---
layout: page
issue: 2020
category: credits
order: 2
title: "PEN & INQ"
---

By [Emma Hiolski](https://www.emmahiolski.com/)

## Politics Built In

<figure>
{% asset 2020/surrogate-humanity.jpg alt:"Book: Genomic (R)Evolution" %}
</figure>

"These days, talk of revolutionary change doesn't usually refer to
politics," said professor of feminist studies and critical race and
ethnic studies [**Neda
Atanasoski**](https://feministstudies.ucsc.edu/faculty/index.php?uid=natanaso).
Instead, it refers to technological advances. But new technologies often
embody old ideas about which jobs can be automated, Atanasoski said.
Such work is devalued as boring, dirty, and repetitive---and has
historically been performed by women, colonized peoples, or immigrants.

In [**Surrogate Humanity: Race, Robots, and the Politics of
Technological Futures**](https://www.dukeupress.edu/surrogate-humanity),
Atanasoski and co-author [Kalindi
Vora](https://fri.ucdavis.edu/people/kalindi-vora), UC Davis professor
of gender, sexuality, and women's studies, explore the myriad ways
technology builds upon racialized and gendered ideas. Darwinian notions
of race and evolution, for example, often are engineered into the
artificial intelligence of [social
robots](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Social_robot).

Technology cannot remedy social inequality by itself and cannot be
separated from politics, said Atanasoski. "Technology is political---how
it\'s engineered, how it\'s used, and how we think, or don\'t think,
about using it."

****

## Strawberry Woes

<figure>
{% asset 2020/wilted.jpg alt:"Wilted book" %}
</figure>

While studying the regulatory battle over soil fumigants used in the
California strawberry industry, professor of social sciences [**Julie
Guthman**](https://feministstudies.ucsc.edu/faculty/index.php?uid=jguthman)
was struck by how deeply the use of these toxic chemicals had permeated
production. "The whole system was built around the presumption of
fumigation," she said.

Interviews with dozens of growers led Guthman to insights about how
[fumigation](https://ephtracking.cdc.gov/showpesticideFumigants)---which
protects plants against soil-borne fungal disease---has changed from
solution to problem. In her book [**Wilted: Pathogens, Chemicals, and
the Fragile Future of the Strawberry
Industry**](https://www.ucpress.edu/book/9780520305281/wilted), winner
of the [2019 AAG Meridian Book
Award](http://news.aag.org/2020/02/aag-2019-book-awards-announced/) for
Outstanding Scholarly Work in Geography, Guthman explores how fumigant
use created a web of reliance across numerous aspects of strawberry
production.

Without fumigation, for example, growers would need to rotate crops to
avoid disease, planting strawberries only once every three or four
years. But no other crop could make that practice economically viable.
"Land was once abundant, but now it's scarce, expensive, and diseased,"
said Guthman. "It's a complex story and there are no easy answers."

****

## Arab Cinema

<figure>
{% asset 2020/arab-modernism.jpg alt:"Book: Arab Modernism as World Cinema" %}
</figure>
American audiences are largely unfamiliar with the films of [Moumen
Smihi](https://bampfa.org/program/moumen-smihi-poet-tangier) and with
Arab cinema in general. [**Peter
Limbrick**](http://film.ucsc.edu/faculty/peter_limbrick), professor of
film and digital media, hopes to change that. In [**Arab Modernism as
World Cinema: The Films of Moumen
Smihi**](https://www.ucpress.edu/book/9780520330573/arab-modernism-as-world-cinema),
Limbrick showcases the Moroccan filmmaker's work, using it as a lens to
refocus our understanding of Arab and global cinema.

"In the West, we have a pretty restricted view of film history in the
Middle East and North Africa," Limbrick said. It's easy to assume most
films from those regions center only on questions of politics, gender,
or relationships with the West. But they also demonstrate beautiful
experimentation with form, music, images, and poetry.

Such films, including Smihi's, reflect the rich history of both Arab and
global cinema. "These films are multicultural, multilingual,
multiethnic," said Limbrick. "I want people to recognize the diversity
and possibility of Arab cinema."

****

## Heritage Education

<figure>
{% asset 2020/heritage-education.jpg alt:"Book: Visualizing Number Theory" %}
</figure>

When granted a rare opportunity to observe teaching practices at a
brand-new, charter high school in Tucson, [**Kimberly Adilia
Helmer**](https://campusdirectory.ucsc.edu/cd_detail?uid=khelmer) wasn't
sure what her research would focus on. But Helmer, a teaching professor
in the Writing Program who studies educational and linguistic
anthropology, soon recognized that the school's compulsory Spanish class
was going poorly.

The students, heritage speakers of Mexican origin, responded negatively
to the teaching and exercises, all designed for non-native speakers. At
the same time, they thrived in their English-based humanities course,
which used more authentic learning materials.

Helmer compares and contrasts these approaches in [**Learning and Not
Learning in the Heritage Language Classroom: Engaging Mexican-Origin
Students**](http://www.multilingual-matters.com/author_results.asp?sf1=contributor&st1=Kimberly%20Adilia%20Helmer).
A heritage Spanish speaker herself, Helmer highlights the likely
benefits of designing teaching methods and practices specifically for
heritage speakers and learners: "It\'s good for the brain, good for
society, good for social justice and peace, and good for the economy."

****

## Cosmic Questions

<figure>
{% asset 2020/cosmic-questions.jpg alt:"Book: Letters to Memory" %}
</figure>
"If you want to understand the established current view of fundamental
physics, this is not the book for you. If you want to go on a bit of an
adventure into the unknown, then it might be," said professor of physics
[**Anthony Aguirre**](http://scipp.ucsc.edu/~aguirre/Home.html). In
[**Cosmological Koans: A Journey to the Heart of Physical
Reality**](https://www.amazon.com/Cosmological-Koans-Journey-Physical-Reality/dp/0393609219),
Aguirre adopts the Zen tradition of [koan
practice](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/K%C5%8Dan) to explore paradoxes
of physics and the cosmos.

In a series of more than 50 vignettes, Aguirre leads readers on a
journey set in the early 17th century, starting in Italy and ending in
Japan. Each vignette's blend of koan and physics commentary both informs
readers and exposes them to deeper and more interesting questions.

Aguirre's goal is to share the experience of grappling with a variety of
meaty, thorny cosmological mysteries. "This is not a book of answers,"
he said, "but a book of questions."
