---
layout: brief
issue: 2020
category: brief
order: 12
title: Boosting blood cells
colors:
    tag: "#84cbd8"
tags:
    - Biomolecular Engineering
---
<figure class="">
  {% asset 2020/stephanie-smith-berdan.jpg @magick:resize=600 alt:'UC Santa Cruz research specialist Stephanie Smith Berdan' %}<figcaption>Research specialist [**Stephanie
Smith-Berdan**](https://www.soe.ucsc.edu/people/stephaniesb), first
author of a report describing a new method for collecting blood stem
cells needed to treat patients with blood cancers, performs benchwork in
the laboratory of professor of biomolecular engineering Camilla
Forsberg. Credit: C. Lagattuta.</figcaption>
</figure>

Approved in 1998, the drug sildenafil citrate---better known as
[Viagra](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sildenafil)---offered men with
erectile dysfunction a welcome alternative to the invasive solutions
then available for their non--life-threatening but life-altering
condition. As urban legend has it, Viagra's developers initially tested
it as a drug to lower blood pressure and were surprised by its notable
side effect. The rest is history.

Now, researchers led by professor of biomolecular engineering [**Camilla
Forsberg**](https://forsberglab.soe.ucsc.edu/) have found another
potential use for the infamous "little blue pill." Recently published in
[*Stem Cell
Reports*](https://www.cell.com/stem-cell-reports/fulltext/S2213-6711(19)30333-9)
(October 2019), their work showed that the drug enhanced the effect of
the immunostimulant
[plerixafor](https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a609018.html),
boosting the blood [stem cell
mobilization](https://bloodcancerinstitute.com/service/mobilization)
(movement from bone marrow to bloodstream) critical to the [high-risk
transplants](https://www.cancer.gov/about-cancer/treatment/types/stem-cell-transplant)
used to treat---and potentially cure---patients with blood-based cancers
and other immune-based disorders. Extracted from donors or patients
themselves, the mobilized stem cells are "transplanted" into the patient
to reconstitute their blood after a course of high-dose chemotherapy
and/or radiation kills off both normal and malignant cells.

The results suggest that the new combination may provide a more rapid
and effective means of collecting stem cells than older, often
unsuccessful methods needing multiple injections over several days. "We
try to provide paradigms for clinicians to work with," said Forsberg,
whose wide-ranging research focuses on the molecular biology of
[hematopoietic stem
cells](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hematopoietic_stem_cell). "The lab
is where we can do new and crazy things and make discoveries."

*---Thomas Garlinghouse*
