---
layout: post
issue: "2020"
category: feature
order: 7
title: Fungi and fuel rise to the top
subhead: "Grad student research stars in Grad Slam competition"
author:
  name: Emma Hiolski
  file: "2020/emma-hiolski.jpg"
  url: 
banner:
  file: 2020/grad-slam-finalists.jpg
  position: left
further-inquiry:
    - title: "UC Santa Cruz Grad Slam"
      url: hhttps://graddiv.ucsc.edu/events/grad-slam/index.html
    - title: "UC Systemwide Grad Slam"
      url: https://gradslam.universityofcalifornia.edu/

---
{% include_relative sidebars/fungi-fuel-hero-caption.html classes="right" bgcolor="#f1f1f1" %}

"This is a handshake-free event," said [**Quentin
Williams**](https://graddiv.ucsc.edu/about/contact-us.php?uid=qwilliam)
during his opening remarks at the sixth annual [UC Santa Cruz Grad
Slam](https://graddiv.ucsc.edu/events/grad-slam/index.html). Williams,
emcee and acting vice provost and dean of graduate studies, cited
growing concerns about the spread of [the novel Covid-19
coronavirus](https://www.who.int/emergencies/diseases/novel-coronavirus-2019).
The Grad Slam, held for the second year at [Kuumbwa
Jazz](https://www.kuumbwajazz.org/) center in downtown Santa Cruz, was
one of the last university-sponsored events to occur before such
gatherings were canceled in response to the global pandemic. But even
though one judge and one participant were absent due to voluntary
self-quarantine, coronavirus couldn't upstage the evening's enthusiastic
presentations.

Eleven graduate students shared three-minute, public-oriented summaries
of their research in UCSC's portion of the UC-only contest, similar to
the [Three Minute Thesis](https://threeminutethesis.uq.edu.au/) (3MT®)
competition created at the University of Queensland in Australia. A
panel of nine judges, including Santa Cruz Mayor Justin Cummings and
several UCSC alumni, ranked the presentations.

The participants hailed from disciplines spanning planetary science,
psychology, ecology, and beyond. [**Amanda
Carbajal**](https://www.linkedin.com/in/amanda-carbajal-8755635a/), a
Ph.D. student in molecular, cellular, and developmental biology, talked
about how [prion proteins](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Prion)---which
cause neurological diseases in humans and other mammals&mdash;might help
explain the origins of life on Earth. Environmental studies Ph.D.
student [**Justin
Luong**](https://envs.ucsc.edu/about/staff.php?uid=jluong4) shared his
research on restoring native grasses in coastal California&mdash;check out
his [native grass Instagram
page](https://gramho.com/profile/stipapulchra/12270282672). [**Katie
Hellier**](https://www.physics.ucsc.edu/academic-programs/grads/directory-page.php?uid=khellier),
a Ph.D. student in the Physics Department, discussed her work creating
[glass panels that double as solar panels](http://www.soliculture.com/)
for greenhouses. And Earth and planetary sciences Ph.D. student [**Ricky
Garza-Girón**](https://ricky-gg.github.io/) spoke about analyzing
seismic activity during volcanic eruptions to determine when these
cataclysmic events have concluded.

"The presentations this year were really extraordinary&mdash;any of them
could have won," said Williams. But a champion must always be crowned,
and this year the honor of both first place and the people's choice
award (a combined \$3,750) went to [**Tori
Klein**](https://www.chemistry.ucsc.edu/about/directory-page.php?uid=viklein),
a fifth-year Ph.D. student in the Chemistry and Biochemistry Department.
Klein presented her research on using compounds made by a parasitic
fungus to block growth of cancerous cells ("[Using zombie insects to
find a cure for cancer](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gfA_hUViEkM)").
"One of my favorite parts of science is communicating it to a
non-scientific audience," she said. "It means a lot to me that
everyone\'s excited about biochemistry&mdash;it's usually not the most
popular subject in school."

Second place (and \$1,500) was awarded to [**Abel
Mkulama**](https://csp.ucsc.edu/people/2019-cohort/#AMkulama), a
first-year M.S. student in the [Coastal Science and Policy
Program](https://csp.ucsc.edu/). Mkulama, who grew up in Malawi,
presented his work developing fuel briquets for cooking from
agricultural waste to reduce deforestation and indoor air pollution in
his home country ("[How briquets can prevent deforestation and save
lives in Malawi](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kIEQEF0me8Q)").
"Communicating my research is how I can get people to act on it," he
said. "And the Grad Slam provides an opportunity to share it in the most
concise way."

Klein would have represented UCSC at the final round of the
UC-systemwide Grad Slam on May 8, but the event was canceled due to the
Covid-19 pandemic. To watch past presentations, head to
[*gradslam.universityofcalifornia.edu*](https://gradslam.universityofcalifornia.edu/).
