---
layout: page
issue: 2020
category: credits
order: 5
title: "Inquiries & INNOVATIONS"
---

By [Marcus Woo](https://about.me/marcus_woo)

## Inhibiting inflammatory enzymes ##

Enzymes called
[lipoxygenases](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lipoxygenase) help control
the body\'s inflammatory responses. \"We\'re realizing their role in
human disease is quite significant,\" said professor of biochemistry
[**Ted
Holman**](https://www.chemistry.ucsc.edu/about/directory-page.php?uid=holman),
part of a group awarded two related patents for inhibitors of the
lipoxygenases 12-LOX and 15-LOX-1.

Inhibiting 12-LOX could prevent a dangerous condition that afflicts some
surgery patients, potentially saving lives in rare cases where
[heparin](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Heparin), a drug commonly used
to prevent blood clots during surgery, instead induces
[platelets](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Platelet) to aggregate
excessively, triggering stroke and bleeding. And inhibiting 15-LOX-1
could help stroke patients. After an [ischemic
stroke](https://medlineplus.gov/ischemicstroke.html), blood returns to
the brain as the patient recovers. But the oxygen in the returning blood
can also be harmful, and blocking 15-LOX-1 may limit the damage this can
cause.

*Maloney D, Luci D, Jadhav A, Holman T, Nadler J, Holinstat M,
Taylor-Fishwick D, Simeonov A, Yasgar A, McKenzie S.
4-((2-hydroxy-3-methoxybenyzl)amino)benzenesulfonamide derivatives as
potent and selective inhibitors of 12-lipoxygenase. [U.S. Patent
10,266,488](https://patents.justia.com/patent/10266488), filed October
10, 2014, issued April 23, 2019; and Van Leyen K, Holman T, Maloney D,
Jadhav A, Simeonov A, Rai G. Inhibitors of human 12/15-lipoxygenase.
[U.S. Patent 10,287,279](https://patents.justia.com/patent/10287279),
filed February 19, 2016, issued May 14, 2019.*

## Cancer treatment maps ##

A cancer cell is a cell that has run amok. Exactly how this happens
depends on an immense set of possible cancer-causing errors that occur
with great variability among cancer types and individual patients. But
identifying the specific errors could help doctors choose the best
treatments&mdash;to "personalize" therapy for each patient.

To accomplish this, the patented algorithm developed by professor of
biomolecular engineering [**Josh
Stuart**](https://jstuart.soe.ucsc.edu/) and collaborators compares the
genomic blueprints of tumor and healthy cells. The resulting dynamic
pathway map pinpoints the errors that led to the cancer&mdash;and thus
possible targets for therapy. \"The invention takes very complex data
and focuses attention on likely treatment alternatives for patients,\"
Stuart said.

*Vaske C, Benz S, Stuart J, Haussler D. Method of generating a dynamic
pathway map. [U.S. Patent
10,192,641](https://patents.justia.com/patent/10192641), filed October
26, 2011, issued January 29, 2019.*

## More efficient networks ##

In internet networks, databases called [routing
tables](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Routing_table) tell each node
where to route data. When the network is large and dynamic, efficiently
updating the routing tables becomes critical. \"The goal is to reduce
the amount of time and to reduce the amount of messages that have to be
exchanged,\" said [**J. J.
Garcia-Luna-Aceves**](https://www.soe.ucsc.edu/people/jj), professor of
computer science and engineering.

His patented method organizes nodes into hierarchical groups, so that
not every node has to store and send every message about how to update
the tables. The approach would be especially useful for special-purpose
wireless networks that are constantly changing, such as ones used for
disaster relief or on the battlefield.

*Garcia-Luna-Aceves J, Li Q. Method for distance-vector routing using
adaptive publish-subscribe mechanisms. [U.S. Patent
10,091,094](https://patents.justia.com/patent/10091094), filed October
16, 2014, issued October 2, 2018.*

## Finding gut leaks ##

The sugar substitute
[sucralose](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sucralose) can\'t be digested,
so it usually exits the body via the bowel. But finding it in urine or
blood could signal a leak in the gut, due to inflammation from [Crohn\'s
disease](https://www.crohnscolitisfoundation.org/what-is-crohns-disease)
or another gastrointestinal disorder. Doctors typically perform
[colonoscopy](https://www.asge.org/home/for-patients/patient-information/understanding-colonoscopy)
to evaluate such leaks. But measuring sucralose could be simpler,
quicker, and cheaper&mdash;perhaps as an initial screening.

To readily detect and measure sucralose in urine or blood, professor of
organic chemistry [**Baktham
Singaram**](https://www.chemistry.ucsc.edu/faculty/index.php?uid=singaram)
and collaborators invented a chemical process that causes a sample to
glow with a brightness proportional to the sucralose concentration. In
addition, the time between sucralose ingestion and its appearance in
urine or blood reveals the leak's location. \"Using our procedure, we
can say globally where the leak is,\" Singaram said.

*Singaram B, Resendez A, Webb D. Fluorescence method for sensing
chlorinated disaccharides. [U.S. Patent
10,274,483](https://patents.justia.com/patent/10274483), filed June 5,
2015, issued April 30, 2019.*

## RNA-targeted therapy ##

A cancer cell or virus can be inhibited by severing its
[RNA](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/RNA), the coiled molecule that
transmits its genetic material. But to prevent toxic side effects and
the development of resistance, the RNA has to be cut in specific places
along its sequence. Such precise slicing can be done with ribozymes, a
type of RNA that acts like an enzyme.

To get the right ribozymes, [**William
Scott**](https://www.chemistry.ucsc.edu/about/directory-page.php?uid=wgscott),
professor of chemistry, and [**Sara
O\'Rourke**](https://www.chemistry.ucsc.edu/about/directory-page.php?uid=sorourke),
project scientist, invented a way to engineer simplified "hammerhead"
ribozymes. \"It really increases our flexibility to design a potent
inhibitor for pretty much any RNA molecule you could want to target,\"
Scott said. The researchers are applying their technique to develop
drugs for [chronic myelogenous
leukemia](https://www.cancer.org/cancer/chronic-myeloid-leukemia.html)
and RNA-based viruses, like the
[Covid-19](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Coronavirus_disease_2019)
coronavirus.

*O\'Rourke S, Scott W. Catalytic strands of minimal hammerhead ribozymes
and methods of using the same. [U.S. Patent
10,301,626](https://patents.justia.com/patent/10301626), filed March 1,
2016, issued May 28, 2019.*
