---
layout: post
issue: "2020"
category: feature
order: 2
title: Living history
subhead: "New media art connects past to present with archival material"
author:
  name: K. M. Watson
  file: "2020/k-m-watson.jpg"
  url: 
banner:
  file: 2020/living-history-banner.jpg
  position: left
further-inquiry:
    - title: "Isaac Julien Studio"
      url: https://www.isaacjulien.com/
    - title: "Insights into the making of 'Lessons of the Hour' Artist Isaac Julien in Conversation with John Hanhardt"
      url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DJDRSmaQ5eU
    - title: "Views of the exhibition with ASL interpretation: Lessons of the Hour [ASL Interpretation]"
      url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ly5owXZknaE
    - title: "Tate interview with Julien: Isaac Julien---'I'm Interested in Poetry' | TateShots"
      url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hcQxjc0mcK0
    - title: "Narrative of the Life of Frederick Douglass, an American
    Slave [PDF]"
      url: https://www.ibiblio.org/ebooks/Douglass/Narrative/Douglass_Narrative.pdf
    - title: "Douglass's last home: Frederick Douglass National Historic Site"
      url: https://www.nps.gov/frdo/index.htm
    - title: "Chronology of Douglass's life"
      url: https://www.nps.gov/frdo/learn/historyculture/frederick-douglass-chronology.htm
    - title: "Photographs of Douglass: U.S. National Park Service Photo
    Gallery"
      url: https://www.nps.gov/media/photo/gallery.htm?pg=2813693&id=3020ED03-1DD8-B71C-07C2C1EA7AD31EF7
   
in-the-news:
    - title: "Isaac Julien on Frederick Douglass: 'It's an extraordinary story' (<em>The Guardian</em>, March 15, 2019"
      url: https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2019/mar/15/isaac-julien-frederick-douglass-lessons-of-the-hour
    - title: "Isaac Julien interview: 'I didn't think my identity as a black British person would be challenged in 2019' (<em>Evening Standard</em>, October 1, 2019)"
      url: https://www.standard.co.uk/go/london/arts/isaac-julien-interview-rock-my-soul-victoria-miro-a4250746.html
    - title: "Isaac Julien: an act of remembrance (<em>Financial Times</em>, May 11, 2017)"
      url: https://www.ft.com/content/64ebe274-33b9-11e7-99bd-13beb0903fa3
    - title: "Isaac Julien, artist -- portrait of the artist (<em>The Guardian</em>, November 26, 2013)"
      url: https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2013/nov/26/isaac-julien-film-portrait-artist
---
{% include_relative sidebars/living-history-hero-caption.html classes="right" bgcolor="#f1f1f1" %}

The 19th-century visionary and orator [Frederick
Douglass](https://www.history.com/topics/black-history/frederick-douglass)
established his place in history by chronicling his life as a series of
revealing events: enslaved childhood, self-education, escape, and an
unending fight for justice and equality. Douglass's remarkable life
provides a powerful canvas for the multifaceted, archive-based art of UC
Santa Cruz distinguished professor of the arts [**[Isaac
Julien]{.underline}**](https://danm.ucsc.edu/people/isaac-julien). Using
innovative new and emerging media techniques and technologies that bring
his historical subjects to life, Julien aims for others to see
them---now including the lifelong activist Douglass---as he does,
through a lens of 21st-century sensibility and perspective.
<figure class="left" style="width:300px;">
  {% asset 2020/julien-in-gallery.jpg @magick:resize=300 alt:'Walbachia in nematode oocyte' %}<figcaption>Julien describes creating his art as involvement in poetry. "My work is
very much a poetic quest for a language to express experiences which are
part of the everyday experience of people like myself," he once told the
[[Tate]{.underline}](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hcQxjc0mcK0).
"Dance, theater, music, sculpture, painting---all of these different
modes of art-making are encapsulated into my practice, which is why I
chose film as a medium for making my work." Credit: [[Jonathan
Binstock]{.underline}](http://mag.rochester.edu/about/directors-letter/),
courtesy of [[Memorial Art
Gallery]{.underline}](https://mag.rochester.edu/), University of
Rochester.</figcaption>
</figure>
{% include_relative sidebars/words-to-fuel-action.html classes="left" bgcolor="#f1f1f1" %}
"I'm very interested in how we can look at these past figures and
contemporize them for a whole new audience," said the moving-image
artist, known globally for his path-breaking work in films and video
installation. To do this in the recently exhibited *[[Lessons of the
Hour---Frederick
Douglas](https://www.isaacjulien.com/projects/37/)s]{.underline}*,
Julien included disparate elements, sometimes all simultaneously:
visualizations of the famous abolitionist in some of his most poignant
moments, broadcasts of his oratory that resonate with today's issues,
and displays of movement surrounding Douglass that can be soothing,
intriguing, and even jarring. The intent, Julien said, is to utilize new
media and cinema technologies, along with new archival research and
understandings, "to create an active relationship between past and
present, as a way of commenting on the moment that we inhabit."
<figure class="" style="width:600px;">
  {% asset 2020/on-train.jpg @magick:resize=600 alt:'Still scene from Lessons of the Hour' %}<figcaption>While making *Lessons of the Hour*, Julien worked with experts in the
history of photography at the [[Eastman
Museum]{.underline}](https://www.eastman.org/) to research and recreate
authentic imagery. Actors portraying Douglass and Anna Murray-Douglass
(who encouraged Douglass to escape from slavery and later married him)
were filmed in a set built to show traveling by railroad, a symbol for
both the Underground Railroad and Douglass's extensive travels. Pictured
here: *The North Star,* 2019, framed photograph on gloss inkjet paper
mounted on aluminum, 160 Ã— 213.29 cm. Credit: Courtesy of the artist
([[Isaac Julien]{.underline}](https://www.isaacjulien.com/)); [[Jessica
Silverman Gallery]{.underline}](https://jessicasilvermangallery.com/),
San Francisco; [[Metro Pictures
Gallery]{.underline}](https://www.metropictures.com/), New York; and
[[Victoria Miro Gallery]{.underline}](https://www.victoria-miro.com/),
London/Venice.</figcaption>
</figure>
The result is a compelling mesh of past and present that provokes the
audience to consider possible connections between the two. This type of
engagement is one of the hallmarks of Julien's work, which spans decades
and covers widely varying social and cultural subjects, including the
Harlem Renaissance poet [[Langston
Hughes]{.underline}](https://www.poetryfoundation.org/poets/langston-hughes)
in the film [*[Looking for
Langston]{.underline}*](https://www.isaacjulien.com/projects/looking-for-langston/)
(1989) and the crisis of migration into Europe in his work [*[Western
Union Small
Boats]{.underline}*](https://www.isaacjulien.com/projects/western-union-small-boats/)
(2007). "Isaac has a way of synthesizing our understanding of the past
that brings its relevance into the present and helps us to understand
how we all connect in the context of history," said [[Jonathan
Binstock]{.underline}](http://mag.rochester.edu/about/directors-letter/),
director of the University of Rochester's [[Memorial Art
Gallery]{.underline}](https://mag.rochester.edu/), during a [[public
talk]{.underline}](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DJDRSmaQ5eU) about
the Douglass exhibition.

*Lessons of the Hour* project curator [[John
Hanhardt]{.underline}](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/John_Hanhardt)
described Julien's work as a type of "philosophical cinema" that brings
ideas, issues of representation and understanding, and knowledge as a
kind of fluid movement between memory and direct experience. "This is
not a linear narrative projected on a single screen. It's 10
screens---different positions, sizes---where you follow the action and
are shaped by the action, just as you are shaped by the visual
experiences you have in your daily life."

Born in London to parents from Saint Lucia in the Caribbean, Julien
previously had limited exposure to Douglass, except for what he had
discovered while on a teaching appointment (1998--2002) at Harvard
University. To begin the project, commissioned in 2017 by the Memorial
Art Gallery as part of an initiative to build its collection of moving
images and also supported by UCSC, Julien explored
Rochester---Douglass's longtime home in New York---and dove into the
university's archives. He and his assistants scoured old books, papers,
magazines, drawings, and photographs, searching for clues to a deeper
understanding of Douglass and his time. Julien found "there was this
inner Douglass world that was fascinating." He also uncovered a
"symbiotic relationship" with Douglass while reading the activist's
"[*[Lecture on
Pictures]{.underline}*](https://www.loc.gov/resource/mfd.22004/?sp=1)."
Called the most photographed American of the 19th century, Douglass,
like Julien, was fascinated by photography and its power to influence
others.

## Shaking the dust off ##

The process that Julien uses for his work is the basis for a new lab he
and longtime collaborator and partner [**[Mark
Nash]{.underline}**](https://danm.ucsc.edu/people/mark-nash), professor
of film and digital media, have established on campus. The [[Isaac
Julien
Lab]{.underline}](https://danm.ucsc.edu/project_group/isaac-julien-lab)
(IJ Lab), modeled in part after Julien's [[London
studio]{.underline}](https://www.isaacjulien.com/), prizes the use of
archival material as an intrinsic part of the creative method. It also
intentionally addresses the university's three [[academic
priorities]{.underline}](https://sap.ucsc.edu/apa/): Justice in a
Changing World, Digital Interventions, and Earth Futures. Its first crop
of students in a Master of Fine Arts program, to begin in fall of 2020,
will be asked to propose a project that involves one or more of these
themes. For Julien's work in particular, issues of social justice are a
common thread.

With its history of inventive thinking in its Humanities and Arts
Divisions, UCSC makes sense as a place for a new media lab that prides
itself on developing ideas and artistic innovations that will "shake the
dust off" traditional ways of creating and viewing art, said Julien. In
addition, its proximity to the San Francisco Bay Area's technological
innovations and world-class art collections, such as the [[Kramlich
Collection]{.underline}](https://www.kramlichcollection.org/) of media
art and the [[Joyner/Giuffrida
Collection]{.underline}](https://www.nytimes.com/2016/10/17/arts/design/righting-wrongs-and-generating-attention-for-art-of-the-african-diaspora.html)
of abstract art, provides vital pools of creativity. This wealth of
resources, Julien said, can stimulate younger people who want to become
artists, as well as those interested in the business aspects of art,
helping to shape a "type of entrepreneurial creator who is able to
navigate the art world as it's constituted today."

In a good example of the practical experience students can expect to
gain, those enrolled in one of Julien's spring classes were slated,
before the Covid-19 shutdown, to help launch a new installation of
*Lessons of the Hour* at the [[McEvoy Foundation for the
Arts]{.underline}](https://www.mcevoyarts.org/) in San Francisco (see
[www.mcevoy.arts](http://www.mcevoy.arts)). The collaboration was
intended to expose students to various aspects of producing an
exhibition, such as helping to organize and set up the gallery space,
and tackling the intricacies of a complex installation that involves
many complicated digital technologies. UCSC students had a similar
engagement with the Douglass project in 2019, said Nash, when
"production of the single-screen version of the work introduced some
students to a specialized editing and sound process, and gave them
access to Julien's expert collaborators." That version of *Lessons of
the Hour* was exhibited at [[Art
Basel]{.underline}](https://www.artbasel.com/miami-beach) in Miami Beach
in December 2019.

## Past is present ##

Combining gallery pieces and film on multiple screens, the original
Douglass exhibition provides a vivid illustration of the complex work
that goes into creating these media projects. Julien and his team not
only researched Douglass and influential people in his life using
archival materials, they consulted with Douglass scholar [[Celeste-Marie
Bernier]{.underline}](https://www.ed.ac.uk/profile/celeste-marie-bernier),
and investigated historical photographic processes, and settings and
sounds of the past. To learn more about how photographs were made at the
time, for instance, they turned to experts at the [[George Eastman
Museum]{.underline}](https://www.eastman.org/), located on the
photography and motion picture film pioneer's Rochester estate. Tintype
specialists guided them in the creation of authentic photographs similar
to those of the Douglass era. Royal Shakespeare Company actor [[Ray
Fearon]{.underline}](https://bbashakespeare.warwick.ac.uk/people/ray-fearon),
who portrayed Douglass, took lessons so he would speak with the correct
accent as he gave life to sections of Douglass's autobiography and
excerpts from three of his hundreds of lectures delivered across the
country and in the United Kingdom: "[[Lessons of the
Hour]{.underline}](https://www.loc.gov/item/mfd.26001/)," "[[What to the
Slave Is the 4th of
July?]{.underline}](https://www.thenation.com/article/archive/what-slave-fourth-july-frederick-douglass/),"
and "[[Lecture on
Pictures]{.underline}](https://www.loc.gov/item/mfd.22004/)." A
combination of environmental sounds, such as the sharp lashing of a
whip, and original scoring inspired by music of the time fill the space
around Douglass's words. For backdrops, Julien and his team created sets
based on their research and traveled to key shooting locations such as
Scotland, where Douglass had exiled himself from 1845--1847 until
supporters raised \$711.66 to buy his freedom.
<figure class="" style="width:600px;">
  {% asset 2020/rapture.jpg @magick:resize=600 alt:'Still scene from Lessons of the Hour' %}<figcaption>A sense of place resonates throughout *Lessons of the Hour* with vivid
imagery and sounds. Pictured here is part of a re-enactment of Douglass
during his self-imposed exile overseas as a fugitive slave,
[[reflecting]{.underline}](https://glc.yale.edu/letter-william-lloyd-garrison-january-1-1846)
on the beauty of America in contrast to the ugliness of its
slaveholding. *Rapture 1846,* 2019, photograph on matte structured paper
mounted on aluminum, 150 Ã— 210 cm. Credit: Courtesy of the artist
([[Isaac Julien]{.underline}](https://www.isaacjulien.com/)); [[Jessica
Silverman Gallery]{.underline}](https://jessicasilvermangallery.com/),
San Francisco; [[Metro Pictures
Gallery]{.underline}](https://www.metropictures.com/), New York; and
[[Victoria Miro Gallery]{.underline}](https://www.victoria-miro.com/),
London/Venice.</figcaption>
</figure>
Julien's work reminds his audiences that issues and struggles of the
past, such as the fight for equality and social justice, continue to
play out. One example is when the actor Fearon, as Douglass, addresses
an audience seated in a [[Royal Academy of
Arts]{.underline}](https://www.royalacademy.org.uk/) lecture hall.
Members dressed in both contemporary and 19th-century clothing listen
intently as Douglass delivers passages from "*What to the Slave Is the
4th of July?*" At the same time on other screens around the room, aerial
drone shots emerge of modern-day Baltimore, the site of the 2015 Freddie
Gray protests and riots that fueled the [[Black Lives
Matter]{.underline}](https://blacklivesmatter.com/) movement against
violence and systemic racism.

Striking the right tone and making Douglass come alive for today's
audiences was a demanding undertaking, said Julien, in part because of
Douglass's formidable historic stature. "The biggest challenge was to
make a work that would be convincing. He's a very tall order." In his
time, Douglass proved to be a powerful and indefatigable man of
influence in the fight against slavery and for equality and justice, and
his legacy continues more than 200 years after he was born. "There is a
strong connection between the kind of quest that Douglass was demanding
and striving for and, if you like, the unfinished business of these
issues in the 21st century," Julien said.
<figure class="" style="width:600px;">
  {% asset 2020/douglass-home.jpg @magick:resize=600 alt:'Fredrick Douglass home' %}<figcaption>Photographs filled the house in Washington, DC, where Frederick Douglass
spent his final years. Intrigued by the emerging technology and called
the most photographed American of the 19^th^ century, Douglass talked
about his fascination with photography in his "[[Lecture on
Pictures]{.underline}](https://www.loc.gov/resource/mfd.22004/?sp=1)."
During his research into Douglass, Julien discovered their mutual
interest in picture-making and its power to influence human relations.
Credit: K. M. Watson.</figcaption>
</figure>
Douglass's great-great-great grandson Kenneth B. Morris, Jr., saw this
connection as well when he cofounded the Atlanta-based nonprofit
[[Frederick Douglass Family
Initiatives]{.underline}](http://www.fdfi.org/). The organization's
efforts focus on modern-day slavery and the global problem of human
trafficking. "When you look at slavery today there are many parallels to
historic slavery," Morris [[has
said]{.underline}](https://matteroffact.tv/descendants-frederick-douglass-still-fighting-slavery-today/).
"It's about profit. It's about exploiting the most vulnerable among us."
Morris now leads the fight for freedom in the same way as his famous
distant relative, through education. Julien said that meeting Morris and
hearing his reaction to *Lessons of the Hour*---he told Julien he was
"extremely moved"---made him feel like he had been successful in making
Douglass come to life in a meaningful way. "As an artist, you have a
responsibility for how you are going to translate feelings, words, and
actions, and do them justice."
