---
layout: post
issue: "2020"
category: feature
order: 9
title: Local goes global
subhead: "As national governments waver, cities take up the climate fight"
author:
  name: Lindzi Wessel
  file: "2020/lindzi-wessel.jpg"
  url: 
banner:
  file: 2020/santiago-chile.jpg
  position: left
further-inquiry:
    - title: "Gordon DJ, Johnson CA. City-networks, global climate governance,
and the road to 1.5°C. Curr Opin Environment Sustain. 2018;30:35-41."
      url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1877343517300775
    - title: "Gordon, DJ. Global urban climate governance in three and a half parts: Experimentation, coordination, integration (and contestation). WIREs Climate Change. 2018;9(6):e546."
      url: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/wcc.546
    - title: "Gordon DJ. <em>Cities on the World Stage. The Politics of Global
Urban Climate Governance</em>. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2020."
      url: https://www.cambridge.org/core/books/cities-on-the-world-stage/6CBDF737BC07DD72592728134CF211FA
in-the-news:
  - title: 'Cities experiment with big ideas to confront "climate emergency" (Reuters News, February 7, 2020).'
    url: https://www.reuters.com/article/us-climate-change-cities/cities-experiment-with-big-ideas-to-confront-climate-emergency-idUSKBN2011VX
  - title: "A small but growing number of cities are tackling climate
    change (<em>Axios</em>, February 19, 2020)."
    url: https://www.axios.com/cities-cope-climate-change-747f809e-e26d-44e8-aea6-ce11f015bde8.html
  - title: 'Mayors of New York, Paris, Los Angeles & Copenhagen: "Why we support the Global Climate Strikes". (<em>C40 Blog</em>, September 20, 2019)'
    url: https://www.c40.org/blog_posts/why-we-support-the-global-climate-strikes

---
{% include_relative sidebars/local-goes-global-hero-caption.html classes="right" bgcolor="#f1f1f1" %}

The Earth's temperature creeps steadily upwards and its oceans lap
progressively higher. Meanwhile, for many national governments,
prioritizing climate change as an imminent threat has fallen off the
agenda. In fact, some of the world's most powerful leaders flatly reject
the existence of man-made climate change. In key countries like the
United States and Brazil, their decisions have even worked to overturn
critical environmental policies aimed at curbing global warming or
tempering its effects.

In the face of this denial, city mayors and other local politicians
across the globe are taking matters into their own hands. More than half
the world's population reside in urban centers, with [[one in eight
people living in megacities of more than 10 million
inhabitants]{.underline}](https://www.un.org/development/desa/en/news/population/2018-revision-of-world-urbanization-prospects.html).
As elected representatives of this vast congregation, city leaders have
banded together, amassing their collective clout and power to confront
the climate crisis.

This local-goes-global movement is the focus of research for UC Santa
Cruz assistant professor of politics [**[David
Gordon]{.underline}**](https://politics.ucsc.edu/news-events/profiles/david-gordon-featured-profile.html),
one of a growing number of political scientists studying how cities
wield their influence. Gordon wants to know how cities as dramatically
different as Ghana's Accra, Vietnam's Hanoi, and Canada's Montreal can
work together to attain shared, global goals. "These cities have no
power over one another and no ability to impose penalties or coerce one
another," he said. "How do they agree on anything and coordinate their
actions to achieve something collectively?"

To answer this question, Gordon examines organizations like the [[C40
Cities Climate Leadership
Group]{.underline}](https://www.c40.org/about), a network of cities from
six continents. C40 member cities have pledged to curb emissions, work
towards a carbon-neutral future, and, in accordance with the [[2015
United Nations Paris
Agreement]{.underline}](https://unfccc.int/process-and-meetings/the-paris-agreement/what-is-the-paris-agreement),
limit global warming to no more than 1.5° C by 2050. The group shares
strategies and blueprints for implementing climate projects and policies
and leverages their collective voice in the hopes of influencing
international decisions on climate change.

## Coming together ##

As of February 2020, the C40 Group included 96 cities, more than double
its 40 first-year members almost 15 years ago. The roster includes [São
Paulo, Brazil](https://staging.c40.org/cities/sao-paulo), which faces a
future of increasing drought, extreme heat, and vector-borne diseases
driven by climate change. It also includes
[Melbourne](https://staging.c40.org/cities/melbourne), which, already
working to troubleshoot sea-level rise, recently saw itself surrounded
by flames as [[record breaking
fires]{.underline}](https://www.nytimes.com/2020/03/04/climate/australia-wildfires-climate-change.html)
raged across Australia. Both cities joined C40, in spite of federal
leadership that denies man-made climate change. Miami, where residents
now regularly trudge through downtown flooding and the number of
dangerously hot days is expected to [[quadruple by
2050]{.underline}](https://www.wlrn.org/post/its-going-feel-100-degrees-florida-lot-more-often-study-finds#stream/0),
stepped around their own conservative state and federal governments to
become one of the most recent C40 members in January 2020.

Other city networks are similarly focused on climate change. For
example, [[the Global Covenant of Mayors for Climate &
Energy]{.underline}](https://www.globalcovenantofmayors.org/), formed
[[when two pre-existing city initiatives merged in
2016]{.underline}](https://www.uclg.org/en/media/news/compact-mayors-covenant-mayors-formally-merge),
links more than 10,000 cities whose leaders are taking steps to prepare
for the eventual impacts of climate change. And the [[Carbon Disclosure
Project]{.underline}](https://www.cdp.net/en), headquartered in London,
tracks carbon emissions from more than 700 cities.

Such groups are attractive not just for cities already dealing with real
impacts of climate change, but also for those looking for opportunities
to grow and modernize, said Gordon. Membership sometimes opens a path
for access to funding from development banks, philanthropies, or
investors, which, in turn, can lead to more climate-friendly
development. This strategy could become more broadly followed once
people see the associated benefits, like more green space and improved
public transportation, Gordon said.

Displaying the beneficial outcomes of adopting such "green" models can
also be a way for cities and their leaders to establish international
standing. But it's a delicate balance, said [[Sara
Hughes]{.underline}](https://saramhughes.com/), assistant professor of
environment and sustainability at the University of Michigan in Ann
Arbor. Too much focus on international issues can exacerbate resentment
of officials who neglect problems within their cities. For example,
"cities have historically not done a great job of addressing
inequality," said Hughes, who studies governance strategies for
responding to climate change in cities. "Whether that can be centered in
some of this work is still an open question."

## Blow back ##

In fact, overstepping local issues for global ones can backfire
drastically, as illustrated by the fall of Toronto's one-time mayor,
[[David
Miller]{.underline}](https://www.weforum.org/people/david-miller). Now
the North American director for the C40 Group, Miller was slammed for
spending too much of his time as mayor on building connections outside
of Toronto instead of dealing with problems plaguing the city's working
class. Many saw Miller as a "globe-trotting elitist," Gordon said, which
contributed to a precipitous drop in his approval ratings and ouster in
2010 by Rob Ford, a politician who, in many ways, embodied the opposite
of Miller's environmental ideals.
<figure class="left" style="width:300px;">
  {% asset 2020/city-action-graphic.jpg @magick:resize=300 alt:'UC Santa Cruz professor Emily Brodsky' %}<figcaption>According to the C40 Cities Climate Leadership Group, a coalition of
more than 90 cities from around the world, the time for cities to act on
climate change is now. An estimated 80 percent of global emissions come
from cities, and the C40 Group supports city leaders in their efforts to
reduce these emissions and reverse climate change. Credit: [Green Energy
Futures](https://www.flickr.com/photos/greenenergyfutures/37056768006/in/photostream/)
(CC BY-NC-SA 2.0).</figcaption>
</figure>
A similar tipping point was reached last October in Santiago, Chile,
another C40 city, as it prepared to host the [[U.N.'s 25th international
Climate Change Conference]{.underline}](https://unfccc.int/cop25). While
researchers and environmentalists geared up for the chance to position
Santiago as a climate leader on the global stage, long-simmering anger
about inequality exploded into weeks of rioting, paralyzing the city and
forcing conference organizers to relocate the conference to Madrid. "If
you don\'t connect a global political project to the interests of people
living in and around your city, there\'s a real problem with the
viability of the whole thing," Gordon said. "That can really throw
everything off the rails in a big hurry."

**Juggling needs**

In fact, how cities juggle the immediate needs of their citizens with
the longer-term, global challenges posed by climate change may be one
major factor determining whether these city coalitions ultimately
succeed, Gordon said. He plans to test this by comparing specific cities
more closely, based on how they score on measures of international and
local accountability.

For example, Quito, Ecuador, has already experienced substantial weather
pattern changes due to an average temperature increase of 1.2° to 1.4°
C. The city is deeply involved in global climate groups but has made
little effort to educate its citizens about why, Gordon said. In
contrast, Iskandar in Malaysia scores high on Gordon's metrics of local
accountability, engaging regularly with its citizens and creating
opportunities for education and input. What could make the difference,
he said, "is the ability to effectively build that bridge between the
interests of cities and the allure of international investment and
recognition."
<figure class="" style="width:600px;">
  {% asset 2020/miami-flooding.jpg @magick:resize=600 alt:'Image of Miami flooding' %}<figcaption>Subject to increasing periods of extreme heat and flooding, as seen
here, the city of Miami declared a climate emergency in November 2019.
Soon after, Miami city leaders side-stepped its climate-denying state
and national governments to become one of the newest members of the C40
Group coalition of cities from around the world working to fight climate
change. Credit: [[Wikimedia
Commons]{.underline}](https://es.wikipedia.org/wiki/Archivo:October_17_2016_sunny_day_tidal_flooding_at_Brickell_Bay_Drive_and_12_Street_downtown_Miami,_4.25_MLLW_high_tide_am.jpg)
(CC BY-SA 4.0).</figcaption>
</figure>
Because this field of research is relatively new, when it comes to what
brings success, there are many more questions than answers, said Gordon,
whose new book (April 2020), [*[Cities on the World Stage: The Politics
of Global Urban Climate
Governance]{.underline}*](https://www.cambridge.org/core/books/cities-on-the-world-stage/6CBDF737BC07DD72592728134CF211FA),
explores these questions. Many cities have made bold climate
commitments, but will they actually be able to deliver? What happens if
their positions conflict with those of their state or national
governments, as has occurred with sanctuary cities in the United States?
And will developing municipalities clash with more modern metropolises
which, despite having made negative environmental impacts in the past,
now are asking others to curb their advancement for the sake of fighting
climate change?

"We really need to better understand what makes city climate action
succeed, and David\'s work in that regard is very important," said
[[Sander Chan]{.underline}](http://sanderchan.nl/), a political science
researcher studying global climate action at the German Development
Institute in Bonn, Germany. "What cities do, and their action or
inaction is vital."
