---
layout: post
issue: "2020"
category: feature
order: 1
title: Nature's master manipulator
subhead: "Exposing the secrets of a successful symbiont"
author:
  name: Robert Pollie
  file: "2018/robert-pollie.jpg"
  url: "http://7thavenueproject.com/"
banner:
  file: 2020/nematode.jpg
  position: left
---
{% include_relative sidebars/2019-vaccine-hero-caption.html classes="right" bgcolor="#f1f1f1" %}

Calling a lowly microbe intelligent may seem over the top, but you can
forgive a little hyperbole when [**Bill
Sullivan**](https://mcd.ucsc.edu/faculty/sullivan.html) describes the
bacterium [*Wolbachia*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wolbachia) as
"really smart." Sullivan, UC Santa Cruz distinguished professor of
molecular, cell, and developmental biology, is explaining how the
intracellular parasite sneaks its way through the embryos of certain
fruit flies and into their nascent eggs, allowing it to pass from one
generation of flies to the next. *Wolbachia* appears to do this by
hitching rides on the fly's motor proteins, which carry supplies to the
egg-producing region of the embryo. The proteins marsvrch along a system of
microtubules, like porters lugging cargo up the gangways of ships.

Partway through the proceedings, the embryo does a 180, flipping the
polarity of the microtubules. Motor proteins that had been trooping
toward the egg-zone do an about-face and start heading away. Getting to
the mothership now requires hopping aboard a different type of motor
protein, designed to seek the "plus" end of the microtubule instead of
the "minus" end. And -- here's the really smart part -- that's exactly
what *Wolbachia* does, deftly rejiggering binding sites on its surface
to make the switch. If, as Sullivan suspects, the embryo's microtubular
reversal is meant to deflect invading parasites, *Wolbachia* does an
end-around and keeps on coming.

## The great pandemic

That maneuver, discovered by Sullivan and colleagues, is just one of
many exploits that have made *Wolbachia* one of the most successful
parasites on Earth. It's believed to infect roughly half the world's
several million insect species. Stick a butterfly or beetle, wasp or
fly, ant or bedbug under a sufficiently powerful microscope, and there's
a decent chance you'll find *Wolbachia* in some of its cells, tucked
into the cytoplasm like tapioca pearls in pudding. *Wolbachia* shacks up
in other invertebrates, too, including mites, ticks, spiders, and some
nematode worms. Its sheer ubiquity has led some scientists to dub the
contagion ["one of the great pandemics in the history of
Life."](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3775348/)

*Wolbachia* doesn't directly infect humans, but it has a way of getting
into the heads of biologists captivated by its machinations, its global
conquests, and increasingly, its potential as a weapon against some of
humanity's greatest scourges. "It's an amazing organism," said [**Laura
Serbus**](https://case.fiu.edu/about/directory/profiles/serbus-laura.html),
a former postdoc of Sullivan's who now studies *Wolbachia* in her own
lab as assistant professor of biological sciences at Florida
International University. "It's teaching us so much about how infections
and cells themselves work."

Sullivan's own relationship with *Wolbachia* started casually enough. He
was teaching an undergraduate genetics course and looking to liven
things up with field trips. When he read that a bacterium, *Wolbachia*,
was sweeping northward through California's fruit fly population, he
hatched a plan: he and his students would hit up local wineries and
apple orchards, collect the swarming flies and analyze them to see if
the infection had reached Santa Cruz County (it had).

That was 20 years ago, and what began as a fling has become a lasting
passion. Today, Sullivan is recognized as a leading expert on
*Wolbachia*, at a time when worldwide interest in the bacterium is
exploding. "The field has gotten so much more crowded and competitive
than it used to be," said population biologist [Michael
Turelli](https://cpb.ucdavis.edu/people/michael-turelli), distinguished
professor of genetics at UC Davis, who's been researching *Wolbachia*
since the late 1990s. "But at the big international meetings, people
still look to Bill when it comes to the cell biology of *Wolbachia*."

## Microscopic moviemaking

In retrospect it was a natural fit. Sullivan was schooled in the
genetics of *Drosophila melanogaster*, the classic laboratory fruit fly
(online he's been known to use the screen name "Count Drosophila"). And
he was adept at methods used to probe the innermost workings of cells.
As a postdoc in the 1980s, he'd cut his teeth in live fluorescent
microscopy, tagging proteins with dyes that light up under the
microscope, then watching, and filming, cellular events as they played
out in real time. Sullivan refers to it as "making movies," and his lab
has produced thousands of [short
films](https://sullivan.mcdb.ucsc.edu/images-movies.html) over the years
(example titles: *Syncytial Divisions*, and the sequel, *Syncytial
Divisions II*).

The first *Wolbachia*-related problem he applied those skills to is
something called cytoplasmic incompatibility (CI), one of the ploys
*Wolbachia* uses to spread among insects. *Wolbachia* is transmitted
hereditarily via insects' eggs, so the more *Wolbachia*-infected females
there are, the more the bacteria propagate. *Wolbachia* helps things
along by turning infected males into a form of selective birth control.
When these males mate with uninfected females, the pairing is sterile.
Infected females, on the other hand, can reproduce successfully with any
male, infected or not. With this big advantage in the mating game,
*Wolbachia*-carrying females outbreed their competition and can quickly
take over populations.

But exactly how CI scuppers the infected male/uninfected female crosses
wasn't known. Using their moviemaking chops, Sullivan and then-postdoc
[**Uyen Tram**](https://molgen.osu.edu/people/tram.1) (now a research
associate at the Ohio State University), traced the problem to a timing
glitch at the very beginning of embryogenesis, just after the egg is
fertilized by sperm and starts dividing. When things are working
properly, paternal chromosomes from the sperm and maternal chromosomes
from the egg are in lockstep as they replicate and line up together in
the middle of the cell. At that point the egg begins cleaving,
ultimately creating two new cells with identical sets of mom and pop
chromosomes. But in the case of CI, the father's chromosomes are late to
the party. They're slow to replicate and fail to line up in time for
cleavage. This leaves the daughter cells with only half the chromosomes
they need. The embryo is DOA.

Sullivan and Tram submitted their findings to the journal [*Science* in
2002](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12004132). The paper was
quickly greenlighted without further revision---a rare feat in the
persnickety world of top-tier science publications. After that
auspicious beginning, Sullivan and team went on to work out a more
detailed model that's a leading theory of how CI works. It explains not
only why normal females can't breed with infected males, but why
infected females can: *Wolbachia* seems to delay the maternal
chromosomes to match the late-arriving paternal ones, ensuring that all
pieces are in place before division occurs.

## Evolutionary ingenuity

That was the first of many Wolbachian mysteries explored by Sullivan and
his collaborators. In 2004, along with postdocs Laura Serbus and
[**Shelbi
Russell**](https://www.linkedin.com/in/shelbi-russell-30baba16) and
then-Ph.D. student **[Patrick
Ferree](https://www.kecksci.claremont.edu/faculty/profile.asp?FacultyID=231)**
(now an associate professor of biology at Claremont McKenna College), he
began tackling another puzzle: how *Wolbachia* gets into the germ line,
the cells that give rise to eggs and sperm. It's a trek the microbes
have to make in each new generation of insects they infect. They start
out scattered throughout the egg cell inherited from the infected
mother, but soon after fertilization, the bacteria begin migrating to
the posterior end of the egg, the part that will become the germ tissue
of the embryonic fly.

Using the tools of knockout genetics (see sidebar) on *Drosophila
melanogaster*, Sullivan and team were able to piece together the
[molecular
mechanics](https://sullivan.mcdb.ucsc.edu/pdf/Serbus_2007.pdf) described
in the opening paragraphs above: how *Wolbachia* infiltrates cellular
supply lines, latches onto motor proteins, and changes horses in
mid-stream to get to the rear of the egg.

It's a bravura display of evolutionary ingenuity, and not least because
*Wolbachia* strikes such a delicate balance. While it binds to some of
the available motor proteins, it also leaves plenty of slots open for
the embryo's own supplies. "[As Shelbi Russell has
shown](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6110520/),
*Wolbachia* seems to have evolved as a weak competitor for the
attachment sites, so it doesn't impair the embryo's development,"
Sullivan said. Playing nice with hosts is good parasite policy. If they
thrive, so does *Wolbachia*.

Sullivan and his team weren't just uncovering the secrets of
*Wolbachia*; they were developing new tools and techniques for
*Wolbachia* research. Since *Wolbachia* can't live outside of cells,
studying it had previously meant working with whole infected insects:
breeding them, subjecting them to various treatments, dissecting out the
tissues of interest, and eyeballing the samples under the microscope to
see the effects on *Wolbachia*. It was laborious and complicated. With
the help of the cell biologist [Alain
Debec](https://www.ijm.fr/en/185/research-groups/team.htm) of the
[Institute of Ecology and Environmental
Sciences](https://ieesparis.ufr918.upmc.fr/?lang=en) at the Sorbonne
University in Paris, Sullivan's group radically simplified matters by
developing the first *Wolbachia*-infected *Drosophila* [cell
line](https://www.sciencedirect.com/topics/medicine-and-dentistry/cell-line):
cells containing *Wolbachia* that could be raised in vitro. "You can
grow them indefinitely, freeze them, thaw them out whenever you need
them, and do all sorts of neat things," Sullivan said.

One of the neat things Sullivan did was to apply new "high throughput"
lab technology---implemented by UC Santa Cruz professor of chemistry
[**Scott
Lokey**](https://www.chemistry.ucsc.edu/about/directory-page.php?uid=slokey)---to
streamline testing and assays. Instead of wrangling flies, manually
manipulating them and inspecting specimens one by one, he and his team
could process hundreds of cell samples in batches using robotic handling
systems. Mechanized microscopes could scan the samples and analyze the
results. This automated approach made procedures like knockout genetics
hundreds of times faster. "We could accomplish in weeks what would have
taken years," Sullivan said.

## The worm turns

In the mid-2000s, Sullivan's research took another turn when he learned
that *Wolbachia* had been implicated in two major human maladies:
[onchocerciasis](https://www.cdc.gov/parasites/onchocerciasis/gen_info/faqs.html)
and [lymphatic
filariasis](https://www.cdc.gov/parasites/lymphaticfilariasis/gen_info/faqs.html),
better known, respectively, as river blindness and elephantiasis. The
two diseases, which afflict more than 150 million people in tropical
regions, are caused by parasitic filarial nematodes transmitted by
blood-feeding insects. Once in humans, the threadlike adult worms pump
out larvae that circulate through the body and can get stuck in tissues,
causing grievous damage: permanent vision loss in river blindness and
horrific swelling of the limbs and genitals in elephantiasis.

Now researchers were reporting that *Wolbachia* living in the worms was
at least partly to blame. The bacteria, leaking from the nematodes,
seemed to trigger a hyper-immune reaction and severe inflammation
responsible for some of the worst symptoms. What's more, the worms
depended on *Wolbachia* for their very survival. In filarial nematodes,
*Wolbachia* is an "[obligate mutualistic
endosymbiont](https://www.sciencedirect.com/topics/earth-and-planetary-sciences/mutualism),"
a symbiotic sidekick the worms can't live without.

The corollary was clear: kill the germ, and you could kill the worm.
This was a potential game-changer. No drug existed that could safely rid
sufferers of the adult nematodes. Instead, the standard treatment
consists of killing the larvae with "microfilaricide" medications. Since
the adult worms continue to churn out new larvae and can live in humans
for a decade or more, keeping symptoms in check means patients have to
take microfilaricides for years. But what if you could kill the adult
worms after all, by dispatching the *Wolbachia* inside them using
anti-bacterial meds? Then a real cure might finally be at hand.

Initial tests were encouraging. One study found that a six-week course
of the antibiotic doxycycline could sharply reduce filarial nematodes in
elephantiasis patients. That was a major step forward, but still not the
magic bullet researchers were hoping for. Doxycycline isn't safe for
children and pregnant women, and six weeks of drug therapy isn't
practical for the kind of mass administration programs needed to reach
millions of people in underdeveloped areas. The hunt was on for new
compounds that offered speedier, simpler treatment. The effort got a big
boost from the [Bill & Melinda Gates
Foundation](https://www.gatesfoundation.org/), which was pouring
hundreds of millions of dollars Vaccines are one of history’s most important medical advances, shielding large swaths of humanity from more than a dozen diseases. Worldwide, experts estimate that measles vaccinations alone have saved more than 17 million lives since the year 2000. In the United States, as a [National Academies](http://www.nationalacademies.org/) [report](https://www.nap.edu/read/10390/chapter/4%252342) put it in 2003, vaccines are a major reason that “death in childhood is no longer expected.”

And yet, most vaccines are still made with the same basic approach [Edward Jenner](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Edward_Jenner) used for smallpox back in the 1790s: borrowing from nature. Later scientists and clinicians improved on Jenner, to be sure, but their work remained “[empirical](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Empirical_evidence)”—based on observation rather than a coherent theory.

“They didn’t have to understand what a virus was or what an immune system was,” said [Bruce Gellin](https://www.sabin.org/leadership%252523BG), vaccine expert and president of global immunization at the [Sabin Vaccine Institute](https://www.sabin.org/), a research and advocacy nonprofit based in Washington, D.C. Now, however, vaccinology is in the middle of a fundamental shift. “Insights from our investments in basic science have led to leaps in technology that allow you to do things in a totally different way,” Gellin said.

One of the scientists making those leaps is [**Rebecca DuBois**](https://www.soe.ucsc.edu/people/rdubois), assistant professor of biomolecular engineering at UC Santa Cruz. She is a rising talent in “rational” vaccine design, so called because it is based on an understanding of why vaccines work at the molecular level. Instead of borrowing from nature, her approach is to build vaccines from scratch. The aim? In addition to improving on existing vaccines, it’s to develop first-time vaccines for viruses (and other disease agents) that have so far defied vaccination efforts. That includes viruses like [HIV](https://www.cdc.gov/hiv/basics/), but DuBois’s work focuses on more common but less notorious bugs, like [respiratory syncytial virus](https://www.cdc.gov/rsv/index.html) (RSV). “Traditional ways of making a vaccine have in some cases just epically failed,” said DuBois. “So, we’re taking a new approach.”

## Centuries old ##

The current approach is old indeed, and in some ways not terribly scientific. The earliest recorded version of vaccination—in 16th century China—is called variolation. It involved grinding up smallpox scabs and either blowing them up a person’s nose or injecting them under their skin. This proved fatal in about one in a hundred people, but that was much better than the 30 percent rate of death from natural infections, according to the [U.S. National Library of Medicine](https://www.nlm.nih.gov/exhibition/smallpox/sp_variolation.html).

{% include_relative sidebars/2019-rational-vaccine-design.html classes="" bgcolor="#fce5a5" %}

True vaccination was [first attempted](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1200696/) in 1796 by Jenner. At the time, it was widely believed that people who regularly milked cows were immune to smallpox because they had been exposed to [cowpox](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cowpox). Jenner, a surgeon then working in Gloucestershire, England, took material from cowpox lesions and inoculated an 8-year-old boy. In a test that would give modern ethicists the vapors, he exposed that boy to fresh smallpox a few months later, thankfully with no ill effects. His initial paper about this episode was rejected, but after more rigorous work by Jenner and others, the practice became widespread in Europe by 1800. Jenner dubbed it “vaccination,” from “vacca,” the Latin word for cow.

About 90 years later, [Louis Pasteur](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Louis_Pasteur) developed a more scalable way to protect people from viruses. Instead of finding a similar but less dangerous virus like cowpox, he used the actual disease agent he wanted to combat, [rabies](https://www.cdc.gov/rabies/index.html). He rendered it harmless by exposing it to dry air. Then, in another sketchy but successful test, he used an untested formulation to [inoculate two boys](https://www.the-scientist.com/foundations/the-rabies-vaccine-backstory-33441) who had been bitten by rabid dogs. Fortunately, neither developed rabies, a routinely fatal disease.

The professionalism and safety of vaccine development have improved dramatically. But the underlying technology? Not so much. Most vaccines now in use were made by doing what Pasteur did: killing or weakening viruses and showing them to the immune system, like a wanted poster: “Look out for these guys!”

{% include_relative sidebars/2019-new-infections-my.html classes="" bgcolor="#fce5a5" %}

## Molecular locksmithing ##

Vaccination works because the immune system can recognize invaders years or decades after being exposed to them. The human body has a cadre of “memory” cells patrolling the bloodstream. Their job is to recognize an invader, then rapidly produce proteins called antibodies to catch and neutralize it, usually with the help of a goon squad of killer immune cells. Antibodies stick only to one remembered feature on the surface of a specific invader, like a key fits a lock, and then wave a flag to bring in the killer cells.
<figure class="left" style="width:300px;">
  {% asset 2019/astrovirus.jpg @magick:resize=300 alt:'X-ray crystallography images of astrovirus' %}<figcaption>X-ray crystallography images of astrovirus from the DuBois lab. The virus forms an immature, poorly infectious form (top) and a mature, infectious form (bottom). The research group has discovered that astrovirus uses the yellow “spikes” to attach to human cells, and that antibodies can neutralize virus infectivity by sticking to the spikes, stopping the virus from attaching. The group is also trying to develop a vaccine by manipulating the spike with genetic engineering.</figcaption>
</figure>
Conventional vaccines expose the immune system to a whole virus, which can have several surface proteins. And each of those proteins can have several spots where antibodies can stick. This is like giving the immune system a bunch of locks and saying, “here, make keys for these in case you need them.” Rational vaccine design tries to find a single lock that will produce the right key—an antibody that not only sticks but protects. “We’re trying to help the immune system focus,” DuBois said.

It has already started to work. A few vaccines made with a basic version of rational design are now in use, including [Flublock<sup>®</sup>](https://www.cdc.gov/flu/protect/vaccine/qa_flublok-vaccine.htm) for [influenza](https://www.cdc.gov/flu/index.htm) and [Gardasil<sup>®</sup>](https://www.cdc.gov/vaccinesafety/vaccines/hpv-vaccine.html) for [human papillomavirus](https://www.cdc.gov/hpv/parents/whatishpv.html) (HPV). However, early efforts at rational design have also put a lot of focus on HIV, said [**Phil Berman**](https://www.soe.ucsc.edu/people/pwb), UC Santa Cruz professor emeritus of biomolecular engineering. Berman helped lead the effort to develop the first HIV vaccine to enter large-scale human trials. The vaccine was not protective enough to win approval, but the trials produced valuable information, and the Berman lab is now using structure-based vaccine design to develop an improved HIV vaccine. Still, it’s a challenging disease for the relatively new approach. “HIV is the most difficult virus on the planet to work with, whereas there are a lot of other viruses that are very important for human health that this approach should benefit,” Berman said. “Rebecca’s really adding to our understanding of structure-based vaccine design and is filling in a lot of the gaps that have been left by jumping right to HIV.”

DuBois’s work focuses on viruses that mainly infect children, like RSV, and that have no approved vaccines. Her particular method of rational design is called “[reverse vaccinology](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Reverse_vaccinology).” Instead of trying to generate a healthy immune response with a vaccine, she aims to build a vaccine based on a healthy immune response. She said the approach asks, what does the immune system look like in people that either don’t get infected or have mild disease?

In one prominent example of this approach, HIV researchers have studied the 25 percent of patients who generate “[broadly neutralizing antibodies](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Broadly_neutralizing_HIV-1_antibodies),” antibodies that attack many strains of the notoriously fast-mutating virus. Although these antibodies do not fully protect the patients who generate them, studying them has led to vaccine candidates that might prompt stronger immune responses. A few are now in early clinical trials.

## Collaboration and cat whiskers ##

For her work with RSV, DuBois has partnered with drug developer [Trellis Bioscience](http://www.trellisbio.com/) of Redwood City. The company discovered an antibody that binds the G protein on the surface of RSV. Most attempts to create an RSV vaccine have targeted the F protein, the other main component of the virus’s coat. So far, they have all failed, including ResVax, a vaccine candidate that in March proved ineffective in protecting infants when given to their mothers during pregnancy. Colleagues said DuBois’s choice to study the G protein is typical, showing how she can be tenacious but also creative.
<figure class="right" style="width:300px;">
  {% asset 2019/zuzu-the-cat.jpg @magick:resize=300 alt:'Zuzu the cat' %}<figcaption>DuBois collects whiskers from her cat, Zuzu, that he sheds in her house. Her lab uses them to  manipulate protein crystals.</figcaption>
</figure>
“She has taken on incredible challenges and difficult problems, and she has nailed it,” said [Tuli Mukhopadhyay](https://biology.indiana.edu/about/faculty/mukhopadhyay-tuli.html), a fellow virologist and associate professor of biology at Indiana University. “She has figured out things that other people have overlooked.”

For example, DuBois was trying to catch antibodies in the act of binding to [astrovirus](https://www.sciencedirect.com/topics/medicine-and-dentistry/astrovirus), which, like RSV, is a common childhood infection. She tracked down a Spanish researcher at the [Instituto de Salud Carlos III](http://www.isciii.es/), [Alicia Sánchez-Fauquier](https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Alicia_Sanchez-Fauquier), who had created a mouse in the 1990s that produced antibodies to the virus. The mouse’s cells had been lost in a freezer failure, but Sánchez-Fauquier had managed to save a small amount of antibody.

“She said, ‘I’m about to retire, so this is perfect. I’ll empty my freezer and give you everything I have,’” DuBois said. In an unusual maneuver, DuBois used an x-ray image to deduce the sequence of building blocks, known as amino acids, that make up part of the antibody. She then programmed a bacterial cell to produce a miniature version of the antibody. It functioned like the real thing, allowing DuBois and her collaborators to make several discoveries about astrovirus. For example, they [found that](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/27807234?dopt=Abstract), in all cases, the antibodies stick to a much larger part of the virus’s coat than anyone anticipated. This observation explains why previous attempts to develop a vaccine using smaller pieces of the coat did not work. It could, in addition, help design a more effective approach.

“I feel like nothing ever deters her. She’s like, ‘Okay, we have a roadblock. Let’s think about this logically,’” Mukhopadhyay said. That attitude paid off again with RSV. DuBois heard about the new Trellis G protein antibody and decided to just ask for it. “Basically, I emailed Trellis and asked, ‘Hey, can I study your antibody?’ They were a little hesitant, but they said sure.”

“It’s been a very fruitful collaboration,” said [Larry Kauvar](http://www.trellisbio.com/directors.html%252523kauvarModal), Trellis founder and chief scientific officer. “She’s interested in learning about not just how to do science, but how to do science that would be useful from a commercial point of view.”

Once DuBois had the antibody, she wanted to study how it attacked RSV, trying to find the lock on the G protein where the antibody key fits. This requires inducing the proteins to form crystals, which can be shot with x-rays to produce clear images, a method called [x-ray crystallography](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/X-ray_crystallography). It’s an exacting technique. Researchers first must manufacture the protein using bacteria, separate it from other proteins through an elaborate electro-chemical filtering process, and then find the recipe for a solution that crystallizes it in just the right way. Sometimes it takes 500 different formulations to find one that works, DuBois said.

The final step may be the most maddening: pulling a single microscopic crystal out of the solution. DuBois’s strategy for that involves cat whiskers, which, for some reason, work better than just about anything else. Something about them is just right for grabbing a protein crystal, she said, dragging it away from the rest, and then releasing it onto a plate of glass. The cat whiskers aren’t purchased at a scientific supply company, which adds a bit more meaning to the phrase, “built from scratch.” “My cat, Zuzu, a fluffy calico who is quite annoying and meows a lot, occasionally sheds whiskers,” DuBois said. “I always save them and bring them to the lab.”

## A larger toolbox ##

The hard, meticulous work paid off in March 2018, when DuBois, graduate student [**Stanislav Fedechkin**](https://www.linkedin.com/in/stanislav-fedechkin-77862294/), Kauvar, and coauthors, [published](http://immunology.sciencemag.org/content/3/21/eaar3534) their work describing how the antibody attacks RSV in the prestigious journal *Science Immunology*. Trellis, for its part, plans to start clinical trials of its anti-G protein antibody treatment in the next year or so. If proven safe and effective, it would be given directly to infants who come to the emergency room with RSV. This is a potential improvement over the only current product for RSV, which is given preventively to high-risk premature babies. Success would also be a promising sign for a vaccine targeting the G protein.

{% include_relative sidebars/2019-thwarting-rsv.html classes="" bgcolor="#fce5a5" %}

But that vaccine is not yet in hand. It can’t be made from the G protein alone, because that protein is known to weaken the body’s immune response, which would make it unsafe in its current form. To get around this problem, DuBois and her colleagues must mutate the protein to eliminate the unwanted effects and save the good ones. There are lots of potential routes to achieve this. Perhaps a short, harmless fragment of the protein would be enough to key the immune system, or maybe a computer simulation will reveal a tweak that does the job.

By trying out options like these, DuBois and her colleagues are building a much larger toolbox for vaccine development. Gellin, of the Sabin Vaccine Institute, said the grand hope for rational vaccine design is to make people immune to the sneakiest and nastiest of viruses, as well as bacterial and other diseases that have so far eluded vaccine makers. “At the top of the list are HIV, tuberculosis, malaria, and a universal influenza vaccine,” he said. “Those are the ones where these new techniques can be most helpful.”

If the RSV efforts of DuBois and her collaborators pan out (see sidebar), the first step may be to vaccinate pregnant women to protect their babies. The duration of protection is likely to be short, Kauvar said, but even if it lasts only a few months, it would cover much of the period when [the risk of severe illness is highest](https://www.cdc.gov/rsv/high-risk/infants-young-children.html).

Rational design could also help reduce the impacts of other viruses for which there currently is no vaccine, like astrovirus. Americans mostly experience astrovirus as a mild nuisance, DuBois said. “It’s different in developing countries. The infections last longer, there’s no clean water, and children develop co-infections. Ultimately, it can send them to the hospital and affect their growth.”

Indeed, many poorer countries have not received the full benefits of vaccination, and DuBois said she is driven partly by the desire to help children in such places. With that inspiration—and with luck, funding, and tenacity—a loftier goal may be in sight. If vaccines can reach more people and fight more diseases, perhaps everyone, not just the fortunate, will eventually be able to say that “death in childhood is no longer expected.”
into the fight against river blindness,
elephantiasis, and other [neglected tropical
diseases](https://www.gatesfoundation.org/what-we-do/global-health/neglected-tropical-diseases)
that affect the world's poorest people.

Sullivan was no expert on tropical medicine, or nematode worms for that
matter (he is a fly guy), but he knew a lot about *Wolbachia* and
thought he might have something to contribute. Attending a conference on
tropical diseases in 2007, he met scientists from the [Anti-Wolbachia
Consortium (A•WOL)](https://awol.lstmed.ac.uk/), which had begun drug
discovery with Gates Foundation backing. "The problem was that they were
using older, slower assay methods," said Sullivan. "I told them we had a
better way." As luck would have it, the cell line and high-throughput
automated assay system used by Sullivan's team were tailor-made for
testing potential anti-*Wolbachia* drugs.

Two months later, with support from A•WOL and funding by the Gates
Foundation, Sullivan had his own drug-screening operation up and running
on Lokey's high-throughput equipment. Over the next few years, Sullivan
and his team checked almost 5,000 substances, looking for compounds that
could kill *Wolbachia* without harming the host *Drosophila* cells. They
found one,
[albendazole](https://sullivan.mcdb.ucsc.edu/pdf/Serbus_2012.pdf), that
showed promise. Subsequent studies by A•WOL-affiliated researchers
demonstrated that in combination with doxycycline, albendazole was able
to shorten treatment times from six weeks to one. Larger clinical trials
are underway.

After that initial success, it was time to scale up. The Lokey lab was
at capacity, so Sullivan reached out to [the California Institute for
Biomedical
Research](https://www.scripps.edu/science-and-medicine/calibr/)
([Calibr](https://calibr.org/)), a nonprofit that develops
next-generation medicines, and set them up with the cell line and assay
system. Together, Calibr and Sullivan's lab have now identified several
promising drug candidates while screening more than 300,000 compounds.

**The dark side of symbiosis**

While Calibr and other organizations continue to search for new drugs,
Sullivan has gone back to more fundamental questions. The nature of the
worm-germ symbiosis, for example: it's obvious what *Wolbachia* gets out
of the deal---room and board---but what does it bring to the table? To
answer the question, Sullivan and postdoc [**Frederic
Landmann**](http://www.crbm.cnrs.fr/en/team/mechanisms-of-symbiosis-with-wolbachia/)
(now an assistant professor at the [Montpellier Cell Biology Research
Center](http://www.crbm.cnrs.fr/en/) in southern France) treated
filarial nematodes with antibiotics, wiping out the *Wolbachia* inside
them. With the bacteria purged, development of young worms was
scrambled, the embryos fatally deformed. In adult worms,
[apoptosis](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Apoptosis)---a type of
programmed cell death that organisms use to cull unwanted cells---went
wild, leading to the mass suicide of normal cells.

No wonder the worms need *Wolbachia* to live; it seems to play a role in
regulating several essential processes. But for Sullivan, that left a
nagging question. Why do the nematodes rely on a bacterium to do things
that other species, including the worms' own evolutionary forebearers,
could handle quite well on their own? Sullivan believes that something
less benign is at work than the win-win partnership implied by
"mutualistic symbiosis." Instead of providing a service to nematodes in
need, *Wolbachia* may have muscled its way into machinery that was
already working just fine, shoving aside existing components and making
itself indispensable for its own selfish ends.

Sullivan calls this "addictive symbiosis" (a phrase he borrowed from the
book [*The Symbiotic
Habit*](https://press.princeton.edu/books/paperback/9780691113425/the-symbiotic-habit),
by entomologist [Angela E.
Douglas](https://entomology.cals.cornell.edu/people/angela-e-douglas/)),
and he thinks it may be far more common in nature than assumed by
conventional biological thinking, with its "comforting mutualistic
kumbaya view." [He
writes](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5576898/), "I would
argue that many obligate endosymbiotic relationships are more akin to a
big-box store locating in a town: much outcry and displacement, but
ultimately a dependence on its presence. Simply by its presence, the box
store created a need where none previously existed. Both in society and
in biology, addictive symbiosis may be the rule rather than the
exception."

Whether it's a cozy alliance or hostile takeover, worm and germ may be
headed for a full-blown merger. Sullivan and others speculate that
*Wolbachia* might someday become an intrinsic feature of its nematode
hosts, like the ancient bacteria that long ago invaded our single-celled
ancestors and became mitochondria---the intracellular "power houses"
that all higher life forms depend on.

That example points out just how fluid and negotiable roles like
[parasite, pathogen, and
mutualist](https://study.com/academy/lesson/symbiotic-relationships-mutualism-commensalism-amensalism.html)
can be. *Wolbachia* blurs the bright lines between those categories, and
between organisms themselves. It tends to fuzz the boundaries between
scientific domains, too. **"**The work that Bill's done has given us new
insight into how Wolbachia does its thing, and in the long run my bet is
that it's going to help us understand how symbionts in general do their
thing," said [Barton
Slatko](https://www.linkedin.com/in/barton-slatko-42960612), a molecular
parasitologist at [New England Biolabs](https://www.neb.com/) who
studies *Wolbachia* in nematodes. "It goes beyond cell biology and has
implications for population biology, ecology, and evolution."

Exploring those implications is the goal of Sullivan's next big
*Wolbachia* venture, a collaboration with population biologists Michael
Turelli at UC Davis and [Brandon
Cooper](http://www.cooper-lab.org/people.html), an assistant professor
of biological sciences at the University of Montana. Their goal is what
Turelli calls a "grand synthesis" connecting Wolbachia's microscopic
meddling to its large-scale effects on species and ecosystems.

For Sullivan it's just one more twist in a mostly accidental journey. "I
was fascinated by what *Wolbachia* does to cells and had no idea our
work would have biomedical and ecological relevance," he said. "It's
really a story of where curiosity can take you." Curiosity, and,
Sullivan admits, maybe a little something else: "It could be a case of
addictive symbiosis."

**\[Sidebar 1\]**

**Learning by breaking**

It's one of the oldest tactics in the genetics research playbook: to
understand a biological process, knock out the genes that control it
(usually in fruit flies or mice) and watch what goes wrong. In the past,
scientists did this in scattershot fashion using DNA-damaging chemicals.
These days they use more exacting tools like [RNA
interference](https://www.umassmed.edu/rti/biology/how-rnai-works/) and
[CRISPR](https://www.broadinstitute.org/what-broad/areas-focus/project-spotlight/questions-and-answers-about-crispr)
to selectively block the expression of specific genes.

Bill Sullivan isn't just a seasoned practitioner of the craft; he's
written a famous description of it, a parable called [*The Salvation of
Doug*.](https://sullivan.mcdb.ucsc.edu/assays/Sullivan_Doug.pdf) It
tells the story of a geneticist (a stand-in for Sullivan) and a
biochemist (the titular Doug, based on Sullivan's friend [**Doug
Kellogg**](https://mcd.ucsc.edu/faculty/kellogg.html), professor of
molecular, cell, and developmental biology at UC Santa Cruz) applying
the tools of their respective trades to figure out how cars work. The
biochemist grinds up cars and analyzes their chemical composition,
learning a lot about their makeup but nothing of their function. The
geneticist takes the knockout approach, hogtying autoworkers on their
way to the car factory and noting the defects in vehicles rolling off
the assembly line. For example, tying up one worker results in cars that
lack steering wheels and swerve uncontrollably. By a process of
subtraction, the geneticist is able to suss out how cars are built and
what their parts do.

Originally published in a genetics newsletter in 1993, the story took on
a life of its own---downloaded thousands of times, assigned in college
classes, and translated into multiple languages. You'd think any author
would be jazzed to see their prose go viral, but Sullivan is over it.
"I'd rather be known for my research," he said, "but I'm still
introduced at speaking engagements as the guy who wrote *The Salvation
of Doug*."

**\[Sidebar 2\]**

**Weaponizing *Wolbachia***

The viral diseases [dengue
fever](https://www.outbreakobservatory.org/outbreakthursday-1/3/21/2019/the-global-rise-of-dengue-infections),
[zika](https://www.cdc.gov/zika/index.html), and
[chikungunya](https://www.cdc.gov/chikungunya/geo/index.html) have been
spreading at alarming rates in recent years---in part, it's thought,
because [global warming is extending the
range](https://journals.plos.org/plosntds/article?id=10.1371/journal.pntd.0007213)
of the [*Aedes aegypti*
mosquitoes](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Aedes_aegypti) that transmit
the viruses to humans. Now medical researchers are fighting back with a
new weapon: *Wolbachia*.

For reasons still unclear, mosquitoes infected with *Wolbachia* make
lousy hosts for RNA viruses such as dengue, zika, and chikungunya, and
hence don't pass them to humans. *Wolbachia* naturally infects many
mosquito species, but not *A, aegypti.* Organizations such as the [World
Mosquito Program](https://www.worldmosquitoprogram.org/) are working to
change that. They're raising *Wolbachia*-infected female *A. aegypti
and* releasing them into the wild. The infected females breed with wild
males and, assisted by cytoplasmic incompatibility (see figure below),
spread *Wolbachia* throughout the local *A. aegypti* population.
Remarkably, it seems to be working. In pilot studies in Southeast Asia
and Australia, the program has seen [dramatic drops in dengue
transmission](https://www.worldmosquitoprogram.org/en/news-stories/media-releases/wolbachia-mosquitoes-block-dengue-across-australias-far-north).

While that approach aims to tamp down the viruses in mosquitoes, another
method exploits the flipside of cytoplasmic incompatibility to suppress
the mosquitoes themselves. Public health organizations around the world
are raising and releasing *Wolbachia*-infected *A. aegypti* males, which
act like flying contraceptives, mating with wild uninfected females and
ensuring that their eggs don't hatch. Bill Sullivan witnessed this
strategy in action on a 2018 visit to the Sun Yat-sen
University--Michigan State University [Joint Center of Vector Control
for Tropical
Diseases](https://msutoday.msu.edu/news/2019/successful-suppression-of-mosquitoes-using-sterile-males-in-china/)
in Guangzhou, China. "It was incredible," he said. "They were breeding
and releasing 10 million infected males a week," he said. "They'd load
them into little drone airplanes, which zipped around, spitting out a
million mosquitoes at a time."

**Further Inquiry**

-   [Sullivan Lab at UC Santa Cruz](https://sullivan.mcdb.ucsc.edu/)

-   Serbus LR, Casper-Lindley C, Landmann F, Sullivan W, [The Genetics
    And Cell Biology of Wolbachia-Host
    Interactions](https://www.annualreviews.org/doi/full/10.1146/annurev.genet.41.110306.130354).
    *Annual Review Of Genetics.* 2008; 42:683-707.

-   Sullivan W, O'Neill SL, [Manipulation Of The
    Manipulators](https://www.nature.com/articles/nature21509).
    *Nature*. 2017; **543**:182-183.

-   Russell SL, Lemseffer N, Sullivan WT, [Wolbachia And Host Germline
    Components Compete For Kinesin-Mediated Transport To The Posterior
    Pole Of The Drosophila
    Oocyte](https://journals.plos.org/plospathogens/article?id=10.1371/journal.ppat.1007216).
    *PLoS Pathogens*. 2018; 5:14.

**In the News**

-   [Basic research in fruit flies leads to potential drug for diseases
    afflicting
    millions](https://news.ucsc.edu/2018/07/river-blindness.html) (UCSC
    News, July 12, 2018)

-   [Mosquitoes armed with bacteria beat back dengue
    virus](https://www.sciencemag.org/news/2019/11/mosquitoes-armed-bacteria-beat-back-dengue-virus)
    (*Science Daily Newsletter*, November 22, 2019)

-   [Bacteria of the Flies: Tracing the Spread of Disease-Controlling
    Wolbachia](https://biology.ucdavis.edu/news/bacteria-flies-tracing-spread-disease-controlling-wolbachia)
    (UC Davis News, March 9, 2018)

-   [How to Beat Dengue and Zika: Add a Microbe to
    Mosquitoes](https://www.theatlantic.com/science/archive/2016/08/how-to-beat-dengue-and-zika-add-a-microbe-to-mosquitoes/494036/)
    (*The Atlantic*, August 8, 2016)

**\
**

**Artwork**

**\[cover; caption at bottom of TOC on P3\]**

![A picture containing computer, curtain, rain Description automatically
generated](media/image1.tiff){width="2.03125in" height="2.03125in"}

*Wolbachia* (red specks) colonize the developing egg cells of the
nematode *Brugia malayi* (the larger purplish ovals are the nuclei of
the eggs), one of several parasitic worms that cause the neglected
tropical disease lymphatic filariasis, better known as elephantiasis. By
infiltrating the eggs of these nematodes and many other invertebrates,
the bacterium is able to spread from one generation of hosts to the
next. That and many other canny survival strategies have made
*Wolbachia* one of the world's most ubiquitous organisms and an object
of increasing fascination to biologists. Credit: Laura Chappell, with
permission.

**\[other artwork\]**

![A picture containing star Description automatically
generated](media/image2.tiff){width="4.34375in"
height="2.1718755468066493in"}

***Wolbachia* (red specks) in the developing egg cells of the nematode**
*Brugia malayi* (the larger purplish ovals are the nuclei of the eggs),
one of several parasitic worms that cause the neglected tropical disease
lymphatic filariasis, better known as elephantiasis. In these filarial
nematodes, *Wolbachia* is an "obligate mutualistic endosymbiont," a
symbiotic sidekick the worms can't live without. Credit: Laura Chappell,
with permission.

![A insect on the ground Description automatically
generated](media/image3.jpeg){width="4.09375in"
height="2.7291666666666665in"}

A common fruit fly, *Drosophila melanogaster*, seen here feeding on a
banana, frequently shows up as an unwanted guest in kitchens, gardens,
orchards, and vineyards worldwide. It also continues to serve as a
widely-used model organism for biological research, including
*Wolbachia* studies in the laboratory of UCSC distinguished professor of
molecular, cell, and developmental biology Bill Sullivan. Credit:
[Sanjay Acharya, Wikimedia
Commons](https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Drosophila_melanogaster_Proboscis.jpg)
(CC BY-SA 4.0).

![A picture containing indoor, sitting, photo, large Description
automatically generated](media/image4.png){width="3.875in"
height="2.9002832458442693in"}

*Wolbachia* is an endosymbiont, a symbiotic organism that only lives
inside the cells of its hosts. Here, *Wolbachia* (large ovals) crowd the
cytoplasm of a fruit fly cell. Credit: Alain Debec, Institute of Ecology
and Environmental Sciences, Sorbonne University, with permission.

![A close up of a red light Description automatically
generated](media/image5.png){width="3.5208333333333335in"
height="3.5136034558180227in"}

Polar express: *Wolbachia* (tiny red specks) are seen here flocking to
the posterior pole (lower right) of a fertilized *Drosophila* egg,
putting themselves in position to get incorporated into the next
generation of eggs. Credit: Laura Serbus, with permission.

![A picture containing indoor, sitting, colorful, table Description
automatically generated](media/image6.png){width="3.84375in"
height="3.2453226159230097in"}

A nematode oocyte (egg-producing structure) shows *Wolbachia* (green
specks) in the developing eggs. Credit: Frederic Landmann, with
permission.

![A close up of a logo Description automatically
generated](media/image7.png){width="3.010291994750656in"
height="2.8125in"}

In many insect species, *Wolbachia* uses a mechanism called cytoplasmic
incompatibility to tilt the reproductive playing field in favor of its
female hosts, promoting its spread through the population. Whereas
*Wolbachia*-infected females can breed with any male---infected or
not---uninfected females can only produce viable offspring with
uninfected males. Credit: Bill Sullivan, with permission.

![A picture containing indoor, building, platform, luggage Description
automatically generated](media/image8.jpeg){width="1.84375in"
height="3.185576334208224in"}

*Wolbachia*-carrying mosquitoes are bred at the Sun Yat-sen
University--Michigan State University Joint Center of Vector Control for
Tropical Diseases in Guangzhou, China. Each rack contains nearly a
million infected mosquito larvae. When released, the infected adult
males mate with wild, uninfected females, rendering them infertile.
Credit Guangzhou Wolbaki Biotech, with permission.

![A kitchen with a table in a room Description automatically
generated](media/image9.png){width="5.416666666666667in"
height="2.174452099737533in"}

Automated screening of anti-*Wolbachia* drugs at UC Santa Cruz was
performed using the high-throughput facility shown here, implemented
with the help of professor of chemistry Scott Lokey. Credit: Roger
Linington, with permission.
