---
layout: brief
issue: 2020
category: brief
order: 13
title: Not just plants
colors:
    tag: "#84cbd8"
tags:
    - Environmental Studies
---
<figure class="">
  {% asset 2020/rust-fungus.jpg @magick:resize=600 alt:'Wild raspberry and rust fungus' %}<figcaption>
Ubiquitous plant-fungus relationships on the UC Santa Cruz campus, most
not as obvious as this one between a wild raspberry and a rust fungus,
are one focus of ongoing research by professor of environmental studies
Gregory Gilbert. Credit: Gregory Gilbert, with permission.</figcaption>
</figure>

Walking across the UC Santa Cruz campus, the towering pines and
wildflowers are easy to spot. Less obvious? The fungi that call these
plants home. But those fungi play key roles in the campus ecosystem.
Just as a human body teems with microorganisms, all plants host fungi
that can help them thrive, cause disease, or anything in between,
according to professor of environmental studies [**Gregory
Gilbert**](https://envs.ucsc.edu/faculty/index.php?uid=ggilbert). "Fungi
really shape everything plants do," he said.

Gilbert, along with professor of ecology and evolutionary biology
[**Ingrid
Parker**](https://www.eeb.ucsc.edu/about/dept-directory.php?uid=imparker),
has collected thousands of plant samples from around UCSC and extracted
their DNA to study what fungi they're infected with. Their goal is to
understand which species of fungi infect which plants, and how those
infections spread over time. Santa Cruz is an ideal place to study these
interactions because of the range of climate conditions and plant
diversity, Gilbert said. "We have this amazing living laboratory
campus."

When a new disease-causing fungus invades an ecosystem, there is often
sparse science to inform---and frequently little time to
determine---what might be done to limit its spread and impact. Gilbert
hopes his research, besides illuminating the less obvious, will help
inform such actions by improving our understanding of the biology
through which plants and fungi interact.

*---Sarah C. P. Williams*
