---
layout: post
issue: "2020"
category: feature
order: 4
title: River of life
subhead: "Modern history ties the altered Nile to disease"
author:
  name: Cameron Walker
  file: "2020/cameron-walker.jpg"
  url: 
banner:
  file: 2020/london-pride-parade.jpg
  position: left
further-inquiry:
    - title: "Derr, Jennifer L. <em>The Lived Nile: Environment, Disease, and Material Colonial Economy in Egypt</em>. Stanford University Press, 2019."
      url: https://www.sup.org/books/title/?id=29529
    - title: "Mikhail, Alan. <em>Nature and Empire in Ottoman Egypt: An
    Environmental History</em>. Cambridge University Press, 2011."
      url: https://www.cambridge.org/core/books/nature-and-empire-in-ottoman-egypt/B05D2208CB9B404D6CA768A62DBAC969
    - title: "El Sharazly BM, Abou Rayia DM, Antonios SN, Eissa SH. Current status of <em>Schistosoma mansoni</em> infection and its
    snail host in three rural areas in Gharbia governorate,
    Egypt. Tanta Med J 2016;44:141-50."
      url: http://www.tdj.eg.net/text.asp?2016/44/4/141/201724
    - title: "Chala, Bayissa & Torben, Workineh. <em>An Epidemiological Trend of
    Urogenital Schistosomiasis in Ethiopia</em>. Frontiers in Public Health. 2018:6. 10.3389/fpubh.2018.00060."
      url: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5844936/
    - title: "WISER: Water Infrastructure for Schistosomiasis-Endemic
    Regions"
      url: https://www.wiserschisto.com/
    - title: "UC Santa Cruz Center for the Middle East and North
    Africa"
      url: https://thi.ucsc.edu/centers/middle-east-and-north-africa/
    - title: "Haseltine, WA. Universal disease screening and treatment---the
    Egyptian example. N Engl J Med. 2020; 382;12:1081-1083."
      url: https://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/NEJMp1915818
   
in-the-news:
    - title: "UC Santa Cruz establishes a new center for the Middle East and North Africa (UCSC News, December 5, 2019)"
      url: https://news.ucsc.edu/2019/12/middle-east-center.html
    - title: "Liver and the Embodiment of Disease: Interview with Jennifer Derr (<em>TRAFO Blog</em>, March 28, 2019)."
      url: https://trafo.hypotheses.org/18077
    - title: "For Thousands of Years, Egypt Controlled the Nile. A New Dam Threatens That (<em>New York Times<em>, February 9, 2020)."
      url: https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2020/02/09/world/africa/nile-river-dam.html
    - title: These tiny aquatic animals secrete a compound that might help snail fever (<em>Science News</em>, October 17, 2019).
      url: https://www.sciencenews.org/article/tropical-disease-parasite-snail-fever
    - title: WHO data show unprecedented treatment coverage for bilharzia and intestinal worms (World Health Organization, December 14, 2018).
      url: https://www.who.int/neglected_diseases/news/unprecedented-treatment-coverage-bilharzia-intestinal-worms/en/
---
{% include_relative sidebars/pronouns-hero-caption.html classes="right" bgcolor="#f1f1f1" %}

<figure class="left" style="width:300px;">
  {% asset 2020/restroom-sign.jpg @magick:resize=300 alt:'All gener restroom sign' %}<figcaption>According to Hammack, the gender binary of "male" and "female" is a
thing of the past, as documented by this sign outside an all-gender
restroom at the San Diego airport in California. Hammack studies the
increasing fluidity and diversity of gender identities among U.S. youth.
Credit: [Wikimedia
Commons](https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:All_gender_restroom_sign_San_Diego_airport.jpg)
(CC BY-SA 3.0).</figcaption>
</figure>

As choices for gender and sexual identities expand, the world slowly
changes

Unlike computers that only deal with "0" or "1", humans can imagine the
often murky grey that exists between viewpoints. When it comes to gender
identity, however, this ability to think beyond a rigid duality remains
unexercised, indeed often culturally taboo, for many people. You are
either man or woman, "she" or "he," and your genetic makeup biologically
forbids you from being anything but one of two genders.

But the world is changing. Increasingly, individuals---especially from
younger generations---are bucking the gender binary. Their
self-identification as either nonbinary or genderqueer, and use of
pronouns including "they" and "ze," means they experience their gender
identity as falling outside the categories of man and woman. The same
goes for sexual identity---an individual's orientation can be more than
just the dyad of heterosexual or homosexual preferences. Accordingly,
many have begun to verbalize their attractions to people regardless of
gender.

Closely observing these changes is [**Phillip
Hammack**](https://psychology.ucsc.edu/faculty/index.php?uid=hammack),
UC Santa Cruz professor and chair of psychology. Hammack, who also
directs the Sexual and Gender Diversity Lab, has devoted his career to
understanding the diversity of sexual and gender identities. His more
recent research explores what nonbinary thinking and the proliferation
of identities mean for intimate relationships.

Despite major victories like marriage equality, Hammack and his
collaborators have discovered that bias and discrimination remain a
problem for lesbian, gay, and bisexual (LGB) individuals, with many
continuing to experience mental and physical stress due to their
minority status. "After 2015, a lot of people thought, 'Well isn't the
fight done now?'" said [Stephen
Russell](https://cns.utexas.edu/directory/item/14-human-ecology/2391-russell-stephen?Itemid=349),
professor of child development at the University of Texas at Austin.
"Yet there are these vexing disparities of well-being for sexual
minority people: these kids don't fare as well as straight kids."

Russell, who focuses on the experiences of sexual minority youth, worked
with Hammack on [a five-year
study](https://williamsinstitute.law.ucla.edu/publications/coming-out-milestones-in-us/)
of LGB adults in America who came of age in different historical
contexts. As part of this research, Hammack delved deeply into the life
histories of LGB community members. "What Phil designed was this
beautiful means of drawing out their lifelines," said Russell. "He
helped them narrate their lives' high and low points and tell us what
they meant."

We spoke with Hammack at UC Santa Cruz's Stevenson College to discuss
the gender and sexual diversity movement, and what his research reveals
about it.

## What's behind the emerging embrace of gender and sexual diversity? ##

 I
think the real, decisive change we see is related to information---how
people access and control it. In the 20th century, we looked to science,
doctors, and medicine as sources of expertise on these topics. And
because we were limited to that basis of how knowledge was constructed
and disseminated, it was hard to challenge the stigma associated with
that framework.
<figure class="" style="width:600px;">
  {% asset 2020/pride-flag-supreme-court.jpg @magick:resize=600 alt:'All gener restroom sign' %}<figcaption>A man waves a Pride flag outside the United States Supreme Court in
Washington, DC, during deliberations on the Obergefell vs. Hodges case
for same-sex marriage on April 28, 2015. Two months later, the Supreme
Court ruled to end marriage discrimination. According to a five-year
study conducted by Hammack and colleagues, marriage equality in the U.S.
hasn't eliminated discrimination against LGB community members. Credit:
[Ted Eytan](https://www.flickr.com/photos/taedc/17113823229) (CC BY-SA
2.0).</figcaption>
</figure>
But then came the internet, and eventually social media. The latter was
pivotal to the creation of nonbinary thinking. It has allowed people to
find one another. You can now educate yourself using Wikipedia, of all
things, about what you feel your identities are. We're no longer limited
to being monogamous heterosexual or homosexual people. We have words
like pansexual, meaning someone who's attracted to others regardless of
their sex or gender identity, and polyamory, the practice of having
intimate relationships with more than one partner. These terms have been
introduced into the popular lexicon. The source of authority on what is
possible for gender and sexual identity is no longer top-down, but
instead bottom-up, which is why we've seen this huge explosion of
language.

## How does this "explosion of language" help? ##

I call it a time of
radical authenticity. You can really embody what feels true and right in
a way you couldn't in the 20th century. It used to be you had the way
you felt but didn't know what you should call this identity. Now, you
can communicate so much about yourself using this language. People ask,
"Why do we need all these terms?" It's because individuals' experiences
are much more diverse than the language historically used to describe
them. We are now slowly accumulating the language necessary to capture
the range of our experiences.

## So, is using the LGBTQ+ moniker still okay? ##

I intentionally avoid
the acronym LGBTQIA because it's identity based---each letter is an
identity---and it's always going to exclude someone's experience.

Viewing sexual and gender diversity as a spectrum rather than composed
of separate categories invites a broader range of people into the
"sexual minority" community. And part of that spectrum includes people
who experience intimacy differently. The paradigm of only hetero and
homo couples is gone. Relationships now include transgender and
nonbinary partners, multiple, consensual partners, or asexual people who
don't experience sexual attraction at all.

**Gender and sexual identity diversity seems to be largely a youth
movement. Are there intergenerational differences among members of the
community?** Ilan Meyer, a scholar for public policy at the Williams
Institute at UCLA School of Law, Stephen Russell, myself, and four other
investigators have worked on the first long-term study of health and
well-being across three generations of LGB people. This [Generations
study](http://www.generations-study.com/), which started in 2015, is
funded by a \$3.4 million federal grant from the Eunice Kennedy Shriver
National Institute of Child Health and Human Development.

Our team not only completed the first random, [national sample of sexual
minority
Americans](https://static1.squarespace.com/static/54f4cc0be4b0014ec19fcbab/t/5df93176c5bb6c13c5f938d5/1576612217279/Generations+Quantitative+Survey+Methods+v17+copy.pdf),
but we did 191 [life-history
interviews](https://static1.squarespace.com/static/54f4cc0be4b0014ec19fcbab/t/5bbbccbcc830255b15be5c67/1539034301392/Generations+qualitative+methods+document_v3+Review+in+Monday%27s+meeting.pdf)
with ethnically and gender diverse LGB people in the 18--25, 34--41, and
52--59 age brackets. We aimed to explore gender identity in a historical
context. What did it mean if you grew up recently with marriage equality
versus 30 years ago in the throes of the AIDS epidemic? The impact of
growing up in one era compared to the other should have ramifications
for the rest of your life.

## What did you observe? ##

There's a relationship between prejudice and
health. People who experienced stigma had more of what we call minority
stress, and due to this they experienced more mental and physical health
problems.

Unsurprisingly, we found that the middle group---of which I am a
part---who grew up during the height of AIDS internalized more stigma
around having sex. They experienced a rhetoric that characterized gay
men as disease carriers who were inevitably going to die, whereas the
older and younger generations shared an openness around sex because that
rhetoric was absent.

## Why are things still difficult for LGB youth? ##

Ilan believed that the
younger cohort would have had less minority stress than the older
generation, but we observed that the way stigma works in people's lives
has just been rearranged. There's now more opportunity to be out, but
that comes with more opportunity for discrimination. Certainly, the
older generation reported experiencing more internalized homophobia than
LGB youth, and the younger cohort have experienced the expanding
diversity of identities.

But stories about bullying and coming out to parents among LGB youth
sound exactly like those from the older generation. The idea that we can
say "Everything's better!" doesn't account for the fact that it's
"better" in the context of having your worth debated publicly. The
Generations study showed that marriage equality and social progress
haven't made as big a difference in people's day-to-day lives as one
might think---at least not yet.

**If you could say one thing to people struggling with their own gender
and/or sexual identities and/or that of others?** Falling outside of
what has been typically considered normal is a privilege, not a curse.
In my own life, it has expanded my consciousness and range of experience
in deeply meaningful ways. The stories we hear of success for those who
are diverse in their gender or sexual identities are typically stories
of embracing one's diversity---reframing the problem away from oneself
and toward a stigmatizing society. Thankfully, that society is changing
rapidly, and those who embrace their diversity are leading the
revolution in how we think about gender and sexuality, opening up space
for a broader range of possibilities in gender, sexuality, and
relationships. Not only are they happier and healthier, they are also
directly changing society for the better by being radically authentic.
