---
layout: brief
issue: 2020
category: brief
order: 7
title: Space sanctuaries
colors:
    tag: "#84cbd8"
tags:
    - Astronomy and Astrophysics
---
<figure class="">
  {% asset 2020/batalha.jpg @magick:resize=600 alt:'James Webb Space Telescope' %}<figcaption>Professor of astronomy and astrophysics Natalie Batalha will be
collecting data from the James Webb Space Telescope, shown here in an
artist's impression, as part of her search for extraterrestrial life.
The new space telescope is scheduled for launch in 2021. Credit:
[Northrop
Grumman/NASA](https://www.flickr.com/photos/nasawebbtelescope/16678793810/in/album-72157624413830771/)
(CC BY 2.0).</figcaption>
</figure>
[**Natalie
Batalha**](https://www.astro.ucsc.edu/faculty/index.php?uid=nabatalh)
thinks there's life on other planets and she's made it her mission to
find it. Before joining the [Department of Astronomy and
Astrophysics](https://www.astro.ucsc.edu/about/index.html) in 2018,
Batalha helped lead NASA's [Kepler
Mission](https://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/kepler/overview/index.html),
which surveyed a section of the [Milky Way
Galaxy](https://www.space.com/19915-milky-way-galaxy.html) and
discovered more than 2,600 new planets. Many were dubbed "Goldilocks
planets"---planets roughly the same size and temperature as Earth,
making them ideal places to search for liquid water and life.

Now, Batalha wants to characterize the atmospheres of some of those
planets. She believes scientists will be able to detect unique
biosignatures in the atmospheres surrounding planets that host life by
learning what's typical when it comes to planetary atmospheres. "I think
living worlds will stand out like a sore thumb," Batalha said.

Batalha will collaborate with researchers from around the world to
collect this atmospheric data using the [James Webb Space
Telescope](https://www.jwst.nasa.gov/), scheduled to launch in 2021 and
orbit in space for five to ten years. In anticipation of that launch,
Batalha is busy analyzing data on new planets being observed through a
telescope at the [Keck Observatory](http://www.keckobservatory.org/) in
Hawaii. The basic information collected there helps her choose which
planets to focus on with the Webb mission.

Searching for extraterrestrial life is not only driven by pure
curiosity, Batalha said, but also questions about what it takes for
planets---including Earth---to sustain life. "We need to make sure our
own planet continues to be a habitable sanctuary for humanity," she
said.

*---Sarah C. P. Williams*
